------------------------------------------------------------------------------

        -- draft --     -- draft --   -- draft --   -- draft --

A Formalized Proposal Review System for GigaMOS Systems Inc.

        Purposes:
           (1)  To assure GigaMOS Systems makes the best possible major design
                decisions, given its resources and goals.
           (2)  To assure that the technical plan, so much as possible,
                reflects a consensus among the design team.
           (3)  To provide a written record of the company consideration on these
                issues.  It is believed that this record will be valuable to the company
                in several ways.  If the same or related issues come up in the future
                the value of a written record of previous deliberations is obvious.
                In addition, the written record provides considerable safeguards against
                "misspeakings", and, in the event of a misunderstanding, may enable the point to
                be clarified without taking the time of the entire set of persons
                involved in the decision making process.
           (4)  To assure technical staff members of GigaMOS systems fair consideration
                of any proposals they might make, including written response
                from Senior Project and Company Management.


        Mechanism:      -- this is a baseline for starters.  Feel free to make suggestions. etc.

        Any technical staff member (or members) who has an idea for a major
        change or addition to the then-existing official
        plans of GigaMOS Systems Inc. is encouraged to submit it
        in the form of an official written proposal.  These proposals will be available as machine readable text
        in the directory JB:PROPOSALS;PROP-nn.  The proposal administrator will be responsible for maintaining
        a table-of-contents file JB:PROPOSALS;TABLE-OF-CONTENTS which will give relevant
        information about each proposal [Title, proposal number, current status,
        date last modified, date of company response, last modified, etc]. Each proposal will
        formally announced to management and project members via electronic mail.

        The proposal, once submitted, will be considered an active document which reflects
        the current state of consideration of its issue;  this avoids the need to read through
        a lengthy sequence of files or messages to "come up to speed" on the issue.  The proposal
        should have sections considering its impact on schedules and resource requirements,
        but these could be dummies early in the proposal's lifetime.  Thus,
        the proposal may be updated or elaborated by those making it and
        technical staff members are encouraged to make comments on the proposal, which should
        be appended to the end of proposal in a distinctive section, labelled with the name
        or initials of the person or persons making them.  Normally, one should not edit
        another's section, except by making short bracketed and signed additions, although,
        if an idea from a suggestion is adopted into the main proposal
        it would be appropriate for the proposal makers to note that fact in the comment
        section where the idea was suggested by some such note as [--this has been incorporated], etc.
        Of course, new versions of the proposal are written out as the current version,
        and earlier versions are not normally deleted until they are backed up.  If file forking occurs,
        (how could forking occur?) it should be straightforward to do a "fair" SOURCE-COMPARE-MERGE.

        The last section of each proposal will be the STATUS section.
        Each project member will have a chance to record his vote in this section.  When voting is
        closed (24 hours after an announcement that voting will be closed or sooner if there is
        no objection), a "verdict" will be deamed to have been reached if there is a 2/3
        vote of those voting in favor of a particular path.  The official plan will be updated
        as per this verdict unless, within 24 hours of receiving formal notification of the verdict, the
        president overrules the verdict.  If he does this, he should record his reasons for so doing
        in the record.


        Calling the Question and Closing
        If the originators of the proposal believe that the record contains sufficient information
        to serve as the basis of a decision, they may Call the Question.  Actively Called Questions will
        will notated in the TABLE-OF-CONTENTS file, and project manager is then responsible
        for updating his response, normally within two working days.

        If the project manager or company president believes that excessive company resources are
        being consumed by a particular issue, or believes that the company is irretreivably
        committed to a certain course beyond the point of useful discussion, he may CLOSE the issue.
        Formal closing of an issue is effective 24 hours after project members have been notified
        and will be indicated buy a change in the status listing in the TABLE-OF-CONTENTS file.
        This really just serves as an advisory to company personel to minimize company resources
        spent on the issue.  Obviously, persons wishing to reopen the issue should take it up with
        management.

        Resource Allocation:  As a general rule, around 10% or so.  I.e. if you are spending
                more than 10% of your time on hassling proposals, etc, think about whether it
                may too much.  (Of course, we are in a major design or original proposal stage,
                then more may be appropriate.)

        Scope:
        Initially, we are going to try out this procedure on the two primary projects of the company.
        Later, if it is successful, we can extend it to other projects and/or new projects that
        may be launched.

        Initial-Software-Plan:  The company will port the LAMBDA software to the Falcon processor.
                The basic method will be to use the existing FLEABIT software base as a
                bootstrap environment to load the LAMBDA software.  The general flow and
                work items are as posted on the chart on the wall, although we are currently
                in the process of revising and updating the chart.  In particular, this proposal
                process is intended to apply mainly to design choices (as per its purposes above)
                and does not primarly concern such things as assign dates to milestones
                or ordering tasks.


        Chip-Hardware-Plan:     The company will advise and review the development of the
                Phoenix Chip processor.  Our current plan is to produce a chip set which is
                software compatible with the current Falcon Board set.
