Received: from MIT-VAX by MIT-MC via Chaosnet; 5 APR 85  17:41:26 EST
Received: by mit-vax.Mit-chaos.Arpa (4.12/4.8) with CHAOS id AA08257; Fri, 5 Apr 85 17:40:37 est
Received: by TRANTOR.Mit-chaos.Arpa (4.12/4.8) id AA01912; Fri, 5 Apr 85 17:40:58 est
Date: Fri, 5 Apr 85 17:40:58 est
From: George Clark <gcc@TRANTOR>
To: rz@TRANTOR


Rich,

   These are some notes that I reconstructed after comming back from MCC.
I would be interested in any comments. If you wish to discuss any of this
with the other SCHEMA people it is probably ok but you should probably delete
any reference to MCC.

MCC Database Stuff

     The MCC CAD project is in the process of conceptualizing a distributed
database which will be used to keep track of all design objects. In the MCC
system all interesting objects are implemented using flavors in a manner
that is similar to what is done in Schema. The following is a
reconstruction of what I believe are the essential features of the MCC
system based on conversations with Katie Rotzel and Mac Michaels. I have
had to fill in some of the details from memory so this may not be completely
accurate.

     (1) Objects are under the control of an object manager which is
resident on each LISP Machine in the system. The object manager is
responsible for storing the object and for retrieving it when required.

     (2) When an object is created a unique identifier is also generated
and is bound to that object.  When the object is first created it is a
private object and exists only in the editing environment of the local
machine.  During this time it can be incrementally modified and added to as
required by the designer.  When the designer is finished with the object
(either temporarily or permanently) he sends it to the object manager.  The
object manager stores the object on the disk by generating an appropriate
dump-form and hashing the disk address under the unique ID.  He may also
generate additional hashing keys to permit the object to be retrieved by
attribute. Once an object is stored away it can never be destroyed and its
identifier cannot be re-used for a different object. Thus one might wish to
use a write once laser disk for this purpose.

     (3) The identifier is the only pointer to a design object.  Objects,
themselves, can only contain pointers to an identifier but never to the
object itself. One consequence of this is that an object may be removed
from the address space by binding its identifier to nil and letting the gc
sweep it away.

     (4) Exact copies of an object can be passed between machines by
sending the appropriate dump forms from one object manager to an other and
then creating an instance in the new address space. The copy is logged in
with the local object manager and its dump-form may or may not be retained.
The copy may be examined or used as the basis of a new part. It may not,
however, be modified. It is also possible for the copy to be used as a
part, maybe a prototype, provided that none of its pointers have to be
reset.

     (5) When a user or a piece of code needs to examine an object it does
so through a call to get-object. Get-object looks to see if the ID is bound
or is non-nil. If the ID is bound it returns the object. If not it sends
the ID to the local object manager who looks to see if the object is in its
local storage system. If so the object is instantiated, the ID is rebound
to the new copy, and the new copy is returned. If the object is not in the
local storage system a message is broadcast to all of the other object
managers and the first one to determine that it has the object returns the
appropriate dump forms. It is also possible to incorporate the identity of
the creating object manager into the identifier. This is probably of
limited usefulness since there is no requirement for the creating
environment to retain permanent ownership.

     (6) If a user or a piece of code needs to modify an object it must
create a new instance and obtain a new ID. When the new instance is a
modification to an existing instance it always contains a pointer back to
its predecessor(s). In this way it is always possible to trace back through
earlier versions and have an accurate reconstruction.  If a user updates a
part of a larger object then he or she (or the system) must deliberately
modify all of the objects which contain this part. This is always possible
by making use of the history pointer on the object and the fact that
objects will always be doubly linked to their actual parents.


     At MCC they are experimenting with a system which writes design
objects directly to the disk and have written some low level primitives for
the LMI machine to do this. Since this is only experimental at this point
they have not bothered to duplicate this code on the Symbolics machine. The
dump forms that they are contemplating using are appropriate modifications
of the FASD stuff. Since their objects do not contain any pointers to other
instances they do not have to go through the usual step of unwinding and
tabulating the instances and they can essentially get away with including
the flavor dbg:fasd-options-mixin in all of their object definitions. As
near as I can tell there is no real advantage to the FASD technique (over
the Schema stuff) and in fact it creates dump forms which are not readily
interpreted by humans. Short of being able to write an exact binary image
(using stable storage objects) I believe that the Schema technique of using
the maker functions as the dump forms is actually preferable.


Date: Wednesday, 14 August 1985, 22:07-EDT
From: George J. Carrette <GJC@MIT-MC.ARPA>
To: GJC-AT-LMI@MIT-MC.ARPA
Message-ID: <[MIT-MC.ARPA].613033.850814.GJC>

Return-path: <RZ@ZERMATT>
Date: Sat, 13 Jul 85 18:39 EDT
From: Richard E. Zippel <RZ@MIT-ZERMATT.ARPA>
Subject: Database accelerator
To: jlk@SCRC-STONY-BROOK.ARPA
cc: terman%VX@MIT-ZERMATT.ARPA, pos%VX@MIT-ZERMATT.ARPA,
    rz@MIT-ZERMATT.ARPA, h@SCRC-STONY-BROOK.ARPA
Message-ID: <850713183933.6.RZ@ZERMATT>

When we've spoken about the database accelerator work before you've
mentioned that both you and Jack were enthusiastic about helping us with
the project.  Well, now we need some help.  Pete Osler (pos@vx) is the
person who will be developing the board that the chips plug into.  He
needs some questions answered about the general structure of the L bus
so he can evaluate different alternatives.  Fortunately Chris Terman,
whose office is 15 feet from Pete's, knows all the answers.  However,
Chris needs to be assured by someone in authority that answering Pete's
questions is OK with Symbolics.  Could you send Chris such a message?
I'll try to catch you on Monday just in case.  Thanks.
