;;; -*- Mode:LISP; Fonts:(METSI); Base:10 -*-

Some comments about LM-PROLOG (... vs other prologs)

 FEATURES THAT SHOULD BE STRESSED.
 LM-Prolog is reasonably fast (14K LIPS on a 200ns
 Lambda, 25K LIPS microcompiled), but more importantly,it
 has various enhancing features, such as:

*       Coroutining facilities, so that the execution is driven
        by the instantiation of variables rather by sequential
        flow of control.
        This feature is essential for the implementation of
        *sound* negation and
        inequality (lacking in most Prologs), which in turn
        are critical for
        the expressive power of Prolog.  It is essential for
        being able to handle potentially infinite data structures
       (the list of all primes etc.)
        The feature is also needed for a logical implementation
        of graphics.
        It is generally useful for a wide range of programming
        techniques
        (`constraints', `spontaneous computations', `perpetual
        processes', etc.)
        Its implementation is very efficient.

*       A `lazy' and an `eager' way of finding all solutions to
        a query are provided as alternatives to the coroutining
        facilities.

*       Multiple databases (worlds), so that parts of the
        knowledge base can be
        dynamically turned off and on by programs or by
        the user.  Good for
        `knowledge engineering', hypothetical reasoning, trace
        packages, etc.

*       User-controllable indexing of predicates.
        Very important in database-like applications.
        Predicates can be indexed on zero or more arguments or
        their subparts.
        Given a query to an indexed predicate, each index
        yields a set of hits.
        Then only the intersection of these hits is actually tried.

*       Prolog's control and data structures are implemented in
        terms of Lisp's,
        which makes interfacing between the languages have
       no overhead.

*       Debugging facilities includes a trace package in the
        flavor of DEC-10 Prolog
        which can trace selective predicates with various
        options, or single step
        an execution or parts of it.

*       Miscellaneous features:
        Predicates can have variable number of arguments.
        Prevention or full handling of cyclic structures can
        be turned on.
        The unifier and the compiler are user extendable.
        A large library of built-in predicates and demo programs
        is included.
        The language Concurrent Prolog is included as a subsystem.

*       DEC-10 syntax is not supported but a translating program
       (written in DEC-10 Prolog) is included, as well as a
       library of compatibility predicates.


Wish List Items:

* An explanation feature of the proofs.

