@comment -*- Mode:Text; Fonts:(TR12 CPTFONT TR12I HL12B TR12B TR12BI) -*-
@library[patbo]
@tolerance 300
@overfullrule 0in
@setpagewidth 6.25in
@advance @normaloffset by 0.15in
@begin[document]
@baselineskip 13pt
@parskip = 0.2in
@sp 4

@nopara
@b[The MOBY Address(c) Scheme and its Application to AI Databases]

@center @b(Submitted to AAAI-86)
@center @b(Engineering Track)
@center @b(AI Architectures and Languages)


@format
@center @b(Richard David Greenblatt)
@center @b(LISP Machine, Inc.)
@center @b(1000 Massachusetts Ave)
@center @b(Cambridge, Mass, 02139.)
@center @b(617-876-6819)
@end format

@nopara
@b(Abstract: )

  A method is presented by which the address space of a computer system,
previously considered one of the most important hardware architectural
parameters, can instead be made a software parameter.  This allows the
implementation of address spaces of arbitrarily large size without changes to
hardware.  The technique applies most naturally to tagged machine architectures.
Beyond simply allowing the execution of very large programs, this scheme makes
possible for the first time the implementation and maintainence of large
non-volatile pointer-oriented data bases having symbol identity.  The symbol
identity property is a primary requirement of the LISP language, and thus is a
requirement of an exceptionally wide range of AI applications.  The scheme is
fundamentally a run-time mapping operation on pointers.

@page

@nopara
@b(Introduction:)

  One of the most important characteristics of a computer system is the size of
its ``address space''.  The effective address space size might be thought of as the
limit to which a program can dynamically grow in a particular computer
architecture without change to the logical structure of the program or its
representation.  Until now, address space size has been considered to be a
hardware determined parameter.  For example, the address space of the LMI
LAMBDA processor family is 2**25. of 32. bit words; this number is determined
by the width of certain hardware data paths, the size of certain mapping
memories, etc.  Although there have been various attempts, such as "overlaying",
to run programs larger than the basic address space of the computer involved,
such efforts have usually encountered serious difficulties. This has been
particularly true for heavily pointer-oriented applications such as LISP.

  The size of address space found in most early computers was comparible to
2**16.  We categorize address spaces of approximately this size as 3transient*, since
the reuse of addresses is frequently necessary within a single application.  Most
modern computers in use today implement address spaces comparable to 2**32,
which we term 3volatile* address spaces since usually there are enough addresses
to avoid address reuse within any single application.  However, the address space
is discarded and reconstructed fairly frequently (i.e. when the machine is ``cold
booted'').  3Volatile* address spaces are usually also 3locally* 3valid*, meaning that a
particular address instance is meaningful only to a single processor (or perhaps a
few closely coupled processors).  3Locally valid* address spaces may simplify
problems of address space allocation, but make impossible direct communication
of pointers from one machine to another.  A few current systems implement
address spaces of 2**48 or more, which we categorize as 3persistent*.  A
3persist*e3nt* address space remains valid over extended periods time, and is
comparable in size to fundamental physical limiting constants
such as the number of microseconds in a thousand years (about 2**55).    3Persist*e3nt*
address spaces may also be 3globally* 3valid*, meaning that that direct communication
of pointers between a wide community of machines is possible.  As AI databases
become larger and incorporate experience accumulated over longer periods of
time, the 3persistent* and 3globally* 3valid* properties will become crucial.
Current techniques for implementing 3persistent* address spaces involve
significant costs in system hardware requirements and system efficiency, because
the wide pointers involved are directly handled by the system CPU
(which has usually consisted of a rather inelegant composition of a previously
available core CPU design with a special ``outboard'' extension).

  The MOBY ADDRESS(c) technique is a fundamental advance which allows the
implementation of 3persistent* and 3globally valid* address spaces of arbitrary size
independent of particular hardware.  Briefly, the MOBY technique consists of
coupling a conventional 3volatile, locally valid* address space supported by
hardware (identified as the local address space), with a 3persistent, globally valid*
address space (identified as the MOBY address space) by means of a runtime
mapping operation on pointers.  Such a coupling is attractive since it allows
actual computation to take place on local pointers of modest width, which saves
hardware and increases efficiency.  The size of the MOBY space may be set to
an arbitrarily high value since it is purely a software parameter.  The scheme
necessitates the ability to reliably distinguish, at run time, pointer data from
non-pointer data.  A tagged machine architecture is the best known means to
support this requirement.

  All address spaces used to implement LISP systems must exhibit a unique
mapping between external names and internal names (i.e. symbols), which we
term the 3symbolic* 3identity* property.  3Symbolic identity* underlies the EQ property
of symbols, among many other things.  The INTERN function, which is
responsible for external name to internal name conversion, operates with the aid
of the object-list or oblist. (In newer LISP systems, the oblist has been
elaborated into the ``package-structure'', which is logically equivalent for current
purposes).  The oblist records every symbol which has ever been input to the
system, together with the internal symbol object associated with that external
name.  Implementing3 symbolic* 3identity* within a 3persistent* address space has not
been practically possible prior to the MOBY technique, due to the intolerable
system bottleneck represented by a single ``world-wide'' oblist.  A single process
which grabbed the lock of the oblist data base and failed to release it would
hang up the entire world of symbolic computation!!  Furthermore, the attempt to
provide 3symbolic identity* within a conventional 3globally valid* address space would
require that all participating hosts be in continuous network communication,
an unacceptable constraint.

 The ability to introduce functionality at the intermediate mapping layer (called
the reconciliation layer) in the MOBY technique is the key to neatly solving
these crucial difficulties.  Since computation never takes place directly
with 3persistent* addresses, the 3symbolic identity* property is no longer required on
them.  Instead, it is required that, after mapping, the resulting local addresses
exhibit 3symbolic identity*, which is easily arranged.  Each host need only maintain
a local oblist, so problems with locking or accessing a global oblist are bypassed.
The exchange of a particular symbol pointer between a pair of hosts results in a
single INTERN operation, as the mapping is established.  Any number of
instances of that symbol can then be communicated between that host pair
without further INTERNs.

  An examination of experience with the two best known3 *long standing
3persistent* address implementations, Multics[ML] and the Domain Network of
Apollo Corp [DN] confirms the intractability of the 3symbolic identity* problem
within these designs and the resulting inability to deliver hoped for advantages.

  The Apollo system (at least in its usual implementation) is unsuitable in that
the minimum ``object'' size is 32K bytes, which allows for only 512 objects
simultaneously in the active address space of the commercially available CPU
which is employed.  This probably explains why LISP implementations commonly
employed on Apollo systems do not support wide pointers internally, thus, they
are not a suitable basis for a 3persistent* data base implementation with 3symbolic identity*.

  Among the long established system, Multics would seem to be the vehicle best
suited for the implementation of a 3persistent* data base with 3symbolic identity*.
(Although, technically speaking, addresses in Multics are only 3locally* 3valid*, this
limitation is not crucial within the tightly coupled multiprocessor timesharing
configuration employed.)  A mature LISP implementation for MULTICS
supporting wide pointers does exist [GB].  Despite this, MULTICS LISP is unable
to deliver to its users any significant feature related to 3persistent* pointers, such
as effective exchange of pointers between computational environments or direct
storage of pointer oriented symbolic data bases in non-volatile form.

  One previously proposed design, the LOOM system advanced by the
Smalltalk group at Xerox Parc [Ka], is similar to the present design in
that it also is a software oriented mapping operation, although it was
proposed to operate on object numbers, not general purpose addresses.
Apparently, the design was not completed and its goals were considerably
more restricted than those of the present design.  In particular,
the problems of3 symbolic* 3identity* discussed here were not addressed.

@nopara
@b[The MOBY ADDRESS(c) System]

  Suppose we have a program represented in the 3persistent* 2**50 address space
of Figure 1.  We wish to execute this program on computer hardware
implementing the 3volatile* 2**25 address space represented by the lower line in
Figure 1.  Assume the desired program starts near location S in MOBY space.
We begin by forming an association between a region M1 of MOBY addresses
around S and a region of local addresses L1.  It could well happen that, as
program execution proceeds, a pointer P2 in MOBY space is followed which
points outside of region M1.  If that occurs, we form a second association
between a region M2 containing P2 and a region of local addresses L2, and so on.

  We refer to reconciliation as the operation of obtaining the associated local
pointer of a given MOBY pointer by reference to the association data base.
Dereconcilation proceeds in the opposite direction, obtaining the associated
MOBY pointer of a given local pointer.

@nopara
@b[The MOBY ADDRESS(c) System compared with a conventional virtual address system]

  Another way to view the MOBY scheme is by comparison with a conventional
virtual address memory system such as is commonplace in current computer
systems.  Such virtual address systems evolved in response to a need to run
larger programs than the amount of physical primary memory (referred to as core
memory) available.  A virtual address system can simulate the effect of a large
amount of core memory with the combination of a smaller amount of core
memory and a large backing store which is usually a disk.  The disk need not
possess truly random access capability, and typically has a cost per bit several
orders of magnitude lower than core memory.  Basically, the image to be run is
maintained on disk, but active parts are ``swapped in'' to core.  The amount of
core available affects only the number of swaps (and thus the time) necessary to
run a given program; the ultimate result is the same as if the entire amount of
physical core had existed.  Note that since the data format is exactly the same
on disk and in core, only simple data transfers are required at the appropriate
times.

  The MOBY scheme is similar, with a key difference, namely, the data format
on disk is NOT the same as the format in core.  In core, data exists with
hardware determined pointer widths, etc, exactly as is conventionally the case.
On disk, however, the data storage format is different, not a simple image of that
in core.  For example, two 32-bit words on disk might be used to represent each
32-bit word which exists in core.  This situation is diagrammed in figure 2.  The
LOCAL format data, shown at the left of the figure, illustrates a 32 bit word
divided into a 2 bit CDR-CODE, a 5 bit DATA-TYPE and 25 bits of pointer or
identity.  This represents no change from the LAMBDA family architecture as it
existed prior to the introduction of the MOBY scheme, thus allowing a mature
software base to function with full efficiency and without modification.  The
right side of the figure shows that the MOBY format provides for a 2 bit
CDR-CODE, 5 bit data-type, and 25 bits of pointer width in word 0, plus an
additional 25 bits in word 1 for a total of 50 bits.  This is sufficient to
implement the 3persistent,* 3globally valid* address scheme desired.  (If still more
address bits were desired, the ratio of words in MOBY representation to words in
local representation could simply be increased).  Some of the remaining 7 bits in
word 1 are used to specify storage consistency modes, mentioned below.

  Swapping operations in the MOBY scheme are not quite as straightforward as
in the ordinary virtual address case, since a format conversion is required.  To
effect this conversion, it is crucial that it be possible to distinguish pointer
data, which must be put through the reconciliation (or mapping) process, from
non-pointer data such as integers, strings, etc., which must be passed though
unchanged.  We estimate that, for a practical optimized system, the net time to
swap in a page from MOBY space may be two to three times greater than the
corresponding time in an ordinary virtual memory system.  (The data transfer
time is significantly less than twice because disk latencies account for a
substantial fraction of ordinary swapin time.  To this is added an estimation
of time taken by reconciliation operations).

@nopara
@b(Incremental Reconciliation and Dereconcilation)

  We introduce a data type (i.e. particular value for the 5 bit data-type field)
called DTP-UNRECONCILED, with the definition that it serves as a placeholder
for MOBY data.  A permissible operation, then, is to dereconcile any typed word
in LOCAL space to MOBY space, and replace the data in local space with a
DTP-UNRECONCILED item.  This operation will not affect program execution
since any time an attempt is made to fetch the data in question into the CPU,
the DTP-UNRECONCILED value in the data type field causes an immediate trap.
This trap initiates the refetch and reconciliation of the MOBY data, after
which, execution continues.  With aid of the DTP-UNRECONCILED data
type, reconciliation operations need not be done immediately when data is
swapped in, but can be delayed until actually necessary.

@nopara
@b(The Local Address Purging Problem)

  It is necessary to be able to recycle local addresses within a MOBY scheme.
One way to see this is to consider what happens if we start up a program 2**26
locations long.  After 2**25 MOBY addresses have been touched, resulting in the
assignment of 2**25 corresponding local addresses, a critical point is reached since
no more local addresses are available, and it is evidently necessary to change the
MOBY association of some local address space.  This, however, can only be done
if there exist no local pointers to the address space in question, since they would
be ``broken'' by any change in the association of the local address space to which
they point.

  The Local Address Purging Problem consists of (logically) making a linear
sweep of the local address data base, dereconciling and replacing with
DTP-UNRECONCILED any pointers to regions of local address space which have
been selected for recycling.  This problem is similar in some respects to the
well known garbage collection problem, but simpler in that pointer following is
not required.

@nopara
@b(The Keeper)

  Various techniques exist for the allocation of addresses in a distributed,
3persistent, globally valid* address scheme.  One possibility, which avoids the need
for the hosts in the network to maintain continuous communication, is to
incorporate the host serial number in all addresses allocated by that particular
host.  This method also avoids the necessity for any global locks connected with
allocating address space.

  By whatever means, it is important that one host, called the KEEPER, be
assigned logical responsibility for each MOBY address.  (Actually, in a redundant
file system design, there could be more than one KEEPER for a given address.
These KEEPERs would have to know about each other, and act in a coordinated
manner, however).  The KEEPER is normally responsible for the physical storage of the
data corresponding to the MOBY address in question, or for knowing where it can
be found if it has been ``checked-out''.

  Each KEEPER maintains a listener which responds to requests for information
(including the data itself) about the ranges of MOBY address space for which it is
responsible.

@nopara
@b(Storage Consistency in a Distributed System)

  For correct program execution, it is necessary to assure that, at a given
moment, a particular MOBY address must have consistent contents as seen from
anywhere within the entire distributed system.  Clearly, read-only data presents
no problem in this regard and may be freely distributed throughout the network.
Alternatively, if there is only a single active physical copy (which we term uniquely
represented data) there is also no consistency problem, although there may well
be a congestion problem if access to the data is required by many hosts.  The
KEEPER would keep track of which processor possessed the physical copy at
any given moment.

  An interesting middle ground is termed write-rarely data.  Similar to read-only
data, write-rarely data may be freely distributed throughout the network, thus
exhibiting a high degree of multi-point availability.  Each host, however, must
maintain the data with read-only protection.  If a write actually is attempted, a
trap occurs.  The trap handler must then contact all hosts having a copy of the
data (via the KEEPER), advising them of the update.  Only when a confirmation
message is received from all hosts possessing a copy of the data can the write
be considered complete.  Writing operations, then, are considerably more
expensive than usual, however, if they are sufficiently rare, this may well be
outweighed by the gain in read accessibility which has been obtained.  File
directories are an example of data whose usage pattern is frequently well
modelled by write-rarely data.

 The ability of the MOBY system to allow dynamic transitions between these
storage modes presents an interesting capability for optimizing network traffic
without change to program structure.

@nopara
@b(Direct Exchange of Symbols)

  As previously discussed, maintaining the correct semantics of pointers to
symbols presents grave difficulties for a conventionally implemented distributed
3persistent* address space, due to the necessity of a single system wide data base
(or oblist).  In the MOBY system, because computation is never performed
directly on MOBY quantities, the problem is neatly avoided.  That is, it is now
acceptable for each distributed host to have its own oblist.  The fact that this
will result in non-identity of MOBY representation for symbols does not matter.
It is only required that the results obtained after the reconciliation mapping
exhibit the required identity properties.  This is easily arranged by a slight
modification to the reconciliation operation.  The result is that after a single
INTERN operation, any number of MOBY pointers to a given symbol can be
exchanged between a pair of hosts.

@nopara
@b(Persistent pointer data bases)

  Quite possibly due to the implementation difficulties we have mentioned,
large 3persistent* data bases with 3symbolic identity* are rarely, if ever, actually
employed today.  Instead, the data is resident in a 3volatile* address space during
active computation.  Periodically, writeouts are made to conventional,
non-volatile, file systems which are capable of storing only ``flat'' objects such as
integers or characters and incapable of storing pointers.  However, widely used techniques
exist which convert a pointer data base to a sequence of integers [FASL].  While
resident in the conventional file system, the data base is in an inert form and
can not be referenced or updated directly.  However, the file can be loaded (as a
whole) back into an active address space for further use.  Since the non-volatile
form of the data does not contain pointers (or particularly pointers across file
boundaries) some problems are avoided, albeit at a high, and in the long run
unacceptable, price.  In particular, as the data base size increases, the copying
operations become increasingly expensive, and the lack of interfile pointers will
require discontinuous changes to program organization as the database is split
into more and more files to attempt to reduce the copying cost.

@nopara
@b(Checkpointing pointer data bases with minimal interruption to ongoing
computation)

  Another fundamental capability which must exist if 3persistent* pointer databases
are to be viable in practice is that of checkpointing the database efficiently.  In
addition to the need for ordinary backup, there must be some way to ``back out''
invalid computation, due to hardware or software malfunction, which may have
corrupted the data base.  The MOBY scheme allows an elegant solution to this
problem.  Briefly, the data to be checkpointed is dereconciled to MOBY space,
producing a consistent updated copy in MOBY dataspace (i.e. the physical disk
space used to hold MOBY representations).  Then those MOBY dataspace pages
are ``frozen'' and the access control of the corresponding local memory pages set
to read-only.  As further writes occur during ongoing execution, the trap
handler must assign new MOBY dataspace for the modified pages.  As this
scheme proceeds, a number of ``incarnations,'' or alternative contents for the
MOBY namespace regions in question, are developed.  If it becomes desirable to
revert to a saved checkpoint, one of these can be chosen and ``plugged'' back in.

@nopara
@b(Unique Address Allocation versus Garbage Collection)

  An additional feature often found in 3persistent* address space architectures is
unique allocation of addresses, meaning that a single address can never be
allocated more than a single time in the entire ``history of the world''.  Although
such a system must fail catastrophically eventually due to running out of
addresses, that time of doom can be postponed indefinitely far into the future
by making the address space large enough.

  A considerable body of literature exists on the alternative possibility, which is
to make possible the recycling of address space, a process known as garbage
collection [BS] [Li].  Unfortunately, garbage collection of a 3persistent* sized
address space presents nearly insuperable problems in spite of the clever
techniques which have been proposed.  A huge amount of network
traffic would almost certainly be required, not to mention the difficulties presented
by write-once or off-line media.  This observation has been made before [Wh],
but the alternative design therein proposed has not proved workable.

  Some authors [Ba] have considered locality of reference improvement as a
possible motivation for garbage collection.  The MOBY scheme dilutes such
arguments, since improved locality of reference can probably be obtained
through modifications to the local to MOBY mapping.

@nopara
@b(Sections, A Means for Direct Storage of Pointer Databases)

  Sections are a conservative method of user interface to the MOBY
address space.  They are a generalization of ordinary files in a
conventional file system, with the additional properties that they can hold
pointer objects such as lists, symbols, and flavor instances.  The usual CONS
function can be used directly to allocate space in a section.  Sections appear in
a directory and have a pathname exactly like ordinary files.  Sections are
manually deleted in the same manner as ordinary files.  If a pointer to the
deleted section still exists, an attempt to reference through it will attempt to
retrieve the section from backing store if it has been saved, otherwise report an
invalid reference.  Note, however, that undetected data corruption cannot occur
since addresses are never reused.  Given the MOBY address space to build on,
the implementation of section is quite straightforward.

@nopara
@b(Costs of the MOBY Scheme)

  One of the most attractive features of the MOBY scheme is that once data is
in local form, there is no overhead (or change whatsoever) in software which
operates on local data.  Hopefully, in most applications, this property alone
will render overheads negligible.

  As previously mentioned, swapins from MOBY space are likely to be two to
three times the cost of comparible swapins in an ordinary virtual address system.
However, we believe it should usually be possible to avoid heavy paging from MOBY space,
making the total cost of MOBY paging relatively modest.

  A potentially troublesome cost could arise if the dynamic working set becomes
large compared to the local address space, which could cause significant
overheads due to local address space purging; the MOBY equivalent of disk thrashing.

  Data bases must be maintained to hold the MOBY to local associations, etc.
It is not anticipated that costs associated with these data bases will be
significant.

  Checkpointing pointer data bases in the manner suggested above involves various
costs. However, these costs are likely to be similar to or less than those involved
in accomplishing similar ends by other means.

  It is beyond the scope of the present paper to evaluate the MOBY scheme
applied to parallel processing situations, however, very good results may be
obtained if the application allows sufficiently coarsely grained parallelism.

@nopara
@b(Derivative Properties of Symbols)

  In addition to their identity, LISP symbols traditionally have associated
properties such as value cells, property lists, etc.  How
should these associated properties be carried over to MOBY space?  A full
discussion of this issue would be beyond the scope of this paper, but we believe
it is better in most cases NOT to simply locate the relevant cells in ordinary
MOBY space.  Instead, obtaining these associations from hash tables is frequently
a better choice.  Although the symbols themselves should be located in MOBY
namespace to obtain the benefits of symbolic identity, the sharing of the
dataspace which underlies this namespace should be controlled by an additional
mechanism.  Machinery introduced in connection with the
checkpointing feature is applicable to this problem as well.

  In fact, a degree of control in sharing of address spaces is critically necessary
to the functioning of a robust, distributed, LISP programming environment.  In
particular, the global environment must not be damaged by a symbol (frequently
NIL!) getting clobbered due to programmer error.

@nopara
@b(Conclusion)

  We believe that the MOBY ADDRESS(c) Scheme provides the basis for solving
a longstanding, fundamental problem in computer science.  A pilot implementation has
been completed, however, the critical proof of concept will be a demonstration
of a robust system under heavy use in a varied environment.

@nopara
@b(Acknowlegment)
  The contributions of George Carrette, Pace Willisson, Joe Marshall, Steven Wyle,
Mache Creeger, David Lienweber, Dawna Provost-Carrette, Sarah Smith and the
LMI Cambridge staff are gratefully acknowleged.


@sp 1
@hrule
@sp 1

This paper describes research done at LISP Machine Inc, 1000 Massachusetts Ave,
Cambridge, MA, 02139.  The author wishes to thank LMI management for their continued
support of this project.

@nopara
@b(Bibliography)

@itemize
@item [Ba]  Baker, H.G., List processing in real time on a serial computer. Commun.
        ACM 21, 4 (April 1978) 280-294.
@item [Bs]   Bishop, P., Computer systems with a very large address space and
         garbage collection.  Tech. Rept. TR-178, MIT Lab for Computer Science,
         Cambridge, Mass, May 1977.
@item [DN]  Nelson, David L. and Paul J. Leach, The Evolution of the
Apollo Domain.  IEEE Compcon Digest of Papers, Spring 1984, pp. 132-141.
@item [FASL] Moon, D. A., The MACLISP Reference Manual, MIT Laboratory for
        Computer Science, Cambridge, Mass. (1974)
@item [GB]   Greenburg, B.,  Multics MacLISP.  The most interesting background
         on this system available is Prose and CONS, MULTICS EMACS: a commercial
         text processing system in LISP.  In Proc. 1980 Lisp Conf., Stanford, Calif.
@item [Ka]   Kaehler, T and Krasner, G, LOOM -- Large Object Oriented
        Memory for Smalltalk-80 Systems, in Smalltalk-80,
        Bits of History, Words of Advice,       Addison-Wesley, 1983.
@item [ML]  Organick, E.I., The MULTICS System, MIT Press, 1972.
@item [Li]   Lieberman, H and Hewitt, C, A real time garbage collector based on the
         lifetimes of Objects, Commun. ACM 26, 6 (June 1983), 419-429.
@item [Wh]   White, J. L., Memory management in a gigantic LISP environment,
         or GC considered harmful.  In Proc. 1980 Lisp Conf., Stanford, Calif.
@end(itemize)

@end(document)

