 LMI Falcon Processor Special Cases for Coding     KHH  12/17/86
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.      Functional Ports - The effect of the pipeline becomes significant
                when using functional I/O. To guarantee that nothing will
                get trampled on the MFIO bus, you must guarantee that
                the MFIO bus is never a source and destination at the same
                time. The case where this happens is as follows:

                        (alu (dest_functional MFIO))
                        (NOP)
                        (alu (rsource_functional MFIO))

                If the data is read on the instruction after the dest, no
                conflict will occur, but the write will not have occured
                yet. By the third instruction after the write, the register
                will be updated and can be read safely. The functional
                registers on the MFIO bus basically consist of all the
                functional ports except the following:
                        VMA, MD-R, MD-W, NOP, RDEST, TRAPOFF, NO-OVF
                These ports will not conflict with the MFIO ever.

2.      VMA I/O - The VMA timing varies somewhat from other functional
                I/O. It is implemented using transparent latches so the
                data being written to it can flow through and start being
                used on the same cycle. This is done to speed up memory.
                Because of this the VMA can be read on the second instruction
                after a write to it.

                Early VMA loads will cause the VMA to be loaded directly
                from the right source register one tick earlier than normal.
                When this is done the previous instruction must NEVER use
                any functional destination other than NOP, NO-OVF, or RDEST.

                If a datatype error occurs during a VMA start read early, the
                VMA will still be loaded, but the memory read will be aborted.
                This effectively changes the dest to just VMA early. This is to
                prevent reading something that is garbage because the type
                hasn't been checked yet.


3.      Use of the TRAP-PC and TRAP-PC+1 functional sources for funny
        subroutine calling. The TRAP-PC+1 register if read at any time
        except the trap entry sequence wil contain the PC of the instruction
        doing the read. The TRAP-PC register is dangerous since it will either
        contain the address of the previous instruction, or the address of the
        end of the trap exit code if a trap was just taken. It can be safely
        used only if global trapping is disabled:

           (jump (unconditional) (rsource-functional TRAPOFF) (addr subr))
                        ...
           subr:
           (alu (aluop INC) (dest return-pc) (rsource-functional TRAP-PC))

4.      Memory cycles - When a normal late memory cycle is started, the
        lock on the VMA and MD for sourcing doesn't happen until the
        MFO output begins, so the instruction after the memory start
        must not source the VMA or MD. It may however use the VMA or
        MD as a destination since this happens later and will get locked.

        The problem does not occur with VMA-START-READ-EARLY cycles, and
        the next instruction may try to source the VMA or MD safely.
