Advantages to running the compiler and core system in SCHEME:

1.  Much easier to track Yale changes.

2.  We can use other front and back ends from Yale.
        - They are working on Common Lisp - we could collaborate.
        - They designed it to be the middle of many compilers,
          so we can pick up other languages if they become availabe.

3.  A SCHEME system is easier to cold load.
    The language that is running during a Lambda cold load is very
    ill-defined and ad hoc and causes many bugs.  We could try to
    improve the situation by defining a subset of the language
    and making the compiler refuse to compile forms that are not
    in that subset.  In a SCHEME system, the language is small
    enough to be included entirely in the cold load, and the compiler
    is already prepared to use enviornments to restrict the
    primitives available to a program.

4.  We do not risk introducing subtle bugs in the compiler during the
      translation.
    The especially scary part is removing tail recursion from the
    compiler so it can compile large programs on the non-tail recrusive
    Lambda.

5.  Expertise from Yale is available, should we want it.

Disadvantages:

1.  SCHEME is an extra language to support.
    However, the data structures are the same.  We have to be able
    to support both Zetalisp and Common Lisp, so the capability to
    have more than one language must be present in the machine.
    As stated above, there will have to be a third language for the
    cold load anyway.

2.  SCHEME is another language that the system software people will have
      to know.
    However, it is very much like Lisp.  The major difference is that
    some primitives have different names.  At any rate, anyone
    graduating from MIT these days has had a year of SCHEME experience.
    (In fact it is very likely that they will have had more SCHEME
    experience than Lisp experience.)

3.  We have to develop debugging tools for running SCHEME in the Lambda.
    This amounts to programs to print SCHEME data structures.  We do not
    believe that this will amount to a major amount of additional work.

Neturals:

1.  The system will run SCHEME anyway.
    Even if the system does not run SCHEME at the low levels, it will be
    easy to add SCHEME as an additional user language.  This is mostly
    because our Lisp will support tail recursion.
