-*- Mode:Text -*-

remove extraneous entries from select-windows column of system menu.

add mode-line for cell-edit-pane: display cell name and location

;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;

arbitrary number of sheets
    consists of named 2-dim array of data
    start with one at init
arbitrary number of grid window sets
    consists of set of windows pointing to sheets
    can save alone, or as an attribute of the set of sheets
    start with one, init to default sheet

startup:
        create a constraint frame with
                status line (1)
                editor window (4)
                command menu (2 or 3)
        and rest of screen as the default grid-window on the default sheet.
        create additional grid-windows as inferiors, using :create-pane;
                fix edges to within area of initial default grid-window

;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;

grammar:

mouse or keyboard oriented?
make all of either possible.

top-level:
        mouse on mouse-sensitive item:
                immediate action from menu
        or mouse on command menu:
                { select-for-display, edit, create, delete, load, save }

after mouse on command menu:
        command menu becomes:
                { window-set, grid-window, sheet, cell, type-in, abort  ;;
                  sel-multiple, sel-rectangle, sel-type-in }
        mouse on one of those, or mouse on mouse-sensitive item.

mouse on modifier / type menu:
        select-multiple, rectangle, type-in-list; or mouse on any row or col header
        window-set, grid-window, sheet, cell, type-in

when using mouse on cell to select cell as answer to query,
        change item-type-alist to nil.
*grid-cmd-alist*        ;;top-level commands
*grid-location-alist*   ;;just return item type and location

top-level commands:
        grammar?:
                { select (display), edit, create-new, del, load (ask), save }
                { multiple (list), row, col, mouse-rectangle, type-in } ;;optional
                { window-set, grid, sheet, file, cell, type-in }
                { do-it }  ;;if any from multiple
        or
                command menu: window-set,
        select window-set:
                select from menu of window-sets and create-new
                completely restructure screen
        select grid-window: bring up where it was displayed last
        select sheet: bring up default whole-screen window for sheet

;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;

grid-window is flavor of mouse-sensitive-typeout window for spreadsheet grid display
grid-window database is list of all grid-windows that have been instantiated
    commands to create, delete, select one at a time
        default is full-outwin, optional select size / location
    add instance vars to grid-window flavor to keep all window state

window-set is a list of grid-windows with sizes and locations of each
window-set database is list of all window-sets
    commands to create, delete and select a window-set
    set is created by storing what is exposed (selectivly?)
        1. whole screen; 2. query each exposed window; 3. mark rectangle with mouse.
    deleting set just means deleting grid-window list entry from database
    selecting displays whole set
nice if it can be saved or at least recovered in proportional format
     so portrait and landscape are interchangable.

sheet is 2-dim array of spreadsheet data; includes default column widths,
    list of other sheets referenced, and associated lisp code.
associated code is a list of editor buffers containing arbitrary code
    that may be referenced by any number of sheets.    The buffers are pointed
    to by the sheets so that they may be saved together.
    Is it possible to dynamically keep the list of required buffers?
    Assign ownership of a buffer when it is created?
    Require user to list buffers use by sheets?
For each sheet, build lists of:
    other sheets: cells referenced outside of sheet
    editor buffers: symbols and functions referenced outside of sheet
plist of symbols indicate editor buffers
 saving/loading editor buffers: send blips to editor for:
    save, load, compile
loading: compare qfasl and text; default to qfasl if newer, ask if not;
    if qfasl, just load it; if text, load and compile; option or command to load text
look at system-menu "layouts" for screen-save info
don't need status window if command-menu label can be used.
leaves command-menu, editor-window and set of grid windows.
default grid window is rest of screen; always in background.

saving, loading sheets:
    save by sheet, set of sheets, grid-window or list-of-, or window-set or list-of.
        maybe sufficient to name sheets to save only by windows
            every sheet has a default grid-window
        maybe necessary to save sheets in separate files from each other and/or windows,
            so that independently edited window sets can share sheets.
            -- declare sheets as read-only; saved in separate files
    make list of sheets named by save-list
        build list of sheets used by each sheet by parsing all cells in sheet
    saving by window-set or set of window-sets:
        flexible heirarchy:
            top level: list of window-sets;
            window-set: named list of grid-windows;
            grid-window: named window into a sheet; includes list of overriding column widths.
            sheet: array of spreadsheet data with default column widths.
                 saved with list of other sheets referenced
    saving by sheet or list-of:
        just above line for list of sheets.

 file pointer from grid to sheet can be sheet in file or sheet in separate file,
     or sheet assumed to be in core.

function to get real column width from heirarch of 1. grid, 2. sheet, 3. default (for grid?)

save / load data: sheet or linked set of sheets
save / restore display parameters: one screen or set of screens





The world consists of a set of two-dimensional arrays, segments
of which may be displayed in individual windows.    Each array cell
may contain an expression, which may be a numeric or string constant
or function.

Cells are globally named by an array name and a cell local name or cell
relative or absolute array index, or locally named by a cell name or
array index.    Cell local names map into single cells, vectors, or
two-dimensional subsets of arrays.

Cell expression contents:
    Numeric constant, any valid lispm data type:
        Evaluates to itself; required for use in numeric expressions.
    String constant (art-string array):
        Evaluates to itself; causes error if referenced by numeric expression.
        Intended primarly for display of spreadsheet labels, but can also
        be referenced in expressions that expect a string.
    List:
        Eval is called.    May contain any valid Lisp expression that evaluates
        to a number or string.
    FEF:
        Funcall.
    Forwarding:
        May reference an expression from another cell, as opposed to
        copying a value computed by another cell.

Referencing spreadsheet data:
simplest:
    (aref foo-array indices ...)
    Not capable of returning a sub-array (anything bigger than one cell).
better:
    (sref foo-array row-range col-range)
    Foo-array may be an array name, or nil for self.
    Row-range and col-range may be numbers, which may be integer constants
     or symbols that evaluate to constants, or a list of (from-index to-index),
     where from-index and to-index evaluate to constants or NIL for the
     lower and upper limits of the array, or the constant NIL for both
     limits of the array.
Examples:
    (+ 3 4) -> 7
    (- (sref gross

Editing / Entry:
    Two paths: cells and zmacs.
        Expressions can be entered as cell contents; the expressions can
        call arbitrary Lisp functions.    The functions are indepently
        managed in a separate editor buffer.
    Creating arrays:
    Creating windows:
    Defining functions:

Internal structure:
    Defstruct for arrays, with header info containing names and sizes.
    Symbol table for each array is attached in array header;
    maps names to zero, one and two-dimensional sub-arrays.
    List of functions from editor buffer.
alt: 3-dim array: 2 dimensions for row/col; 3rd has fixed slots
    for (0) expression, (1) timestamp, (2) names defined here,
        (3) display mode (format string), (4) my-index.

Loading / Saving:
    Arrays are dumped in ASCII list form, the same as in expression mode.
    List for an array has header that specifies names and sizes,
    including symbol table for names defined within.
    LISP functions saved in ASCII format, compiled as loaded?

Display capabilities:

Arbitrary windows, managed by existing system code.    Each window
shows a subset of a spreadsheet array.    For each window, the
contents of the array may be displayed as the unevaluated expressions,
or as the computed values.

Normal display mode is value, where each cell is evaluated and the
result is displayed.    Expression mode displays the cell contents
unevaluated.    Expression editing is normally done in value mode, in
which the expression for the currently selected cell is displayed in an
editor buffer.

Each array may be displayed by an arbitrary number of windows, but
each window may only display a contiguous two-dimentional subset of
one array.

Computation heirachy:

Default: For each cell, if not valid, evaluate it (recursive).
    References to other cells cause them to eval.
    What about recursive references?

Input: When one cell changes, invalidate (recursively) all cells that
    depend on it.    Every reference to a cell attaches a pointer from that
    cell to the cell that references it.    Pointers must be kept consistent
    when editing expressions.

Modes: Evaluate on every cell change vs. eval on command.

;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;

Cell Expression Syntax ...

(cell-ref
(this-cell
(this-array
(this-row
(this-col

v = RC[1] - RC[2]
v = R[-1]C + R[-1]C[1]

net = gross - expenses

cash = cash[-1] + income

expression is evaluated in context of cell that points to it
"indirect" could be:
        1. explicit pointer to a different cell or cell's expression
                (expr (
        2. default expression for a column

(expr cell) means eval-of-expr-in-indicated-cell

...

Can numeric grid be eliminated completely?
graph instead of grid
every cell must be named
window into sheet specifies display locations.
only explicitly mentioned cells are displayed.

grid exists only to identify display locations.
expressions for vectors are written without bounds
and only instantiate cells as required for display

net = gross - expenses ...

cell for net has (- gross expenses).
range of cells or column of window says to display "net".
values displayed is indexed by distance from first cell that says "net".
that cell can say where to start and how to increment.
increment for index is always 1; offset is arbitrary.
increment and offset for printing can be date / time or integer.
        :start-date "date"    ;for (time:parse), nil means now
        :incr-by-year year-increment            ;implies :print-by-year unless overridden later
        :incr-by-quarter quarter-increment
        :incr-by-month month-increment
        :incr-by-week week-increment
        :incr-by-day day-increment
        :print-by-year t
        :print-by-week t
        :length N               ;length of vector; default to infinite

Grid-window has N x M array of display parameters.
        First cell of a column or row has expression for vector.
        Following cells default to vector row or col?
                how to tell which?
                knowledge is in cell-aref: non-existent cell

Efficient cell-value-ref and display update requires
storing values for each displayed cell, but it's
too much work to implement dynamic-size arrays.
So, sheet must have cells for each displayable value,
cells allocated and stored in pre-allocated array slots as required for display.
Window has vector headers for display mode; can indirect into sheet;
window-aref finds cell to use for display info and cell to use for cell-eval;
cell-ref finds cell-expr to use; cell-eval gets correct environment.

display modes:
        1. scrollable screen window, smaller than desired,
           for on-screen display and editing.
        2. display for printing; superset of (1), perhaps
           by assuming maximum bounds of each window.
        3. raw or heirarchical display for editing structure?

to display random lisp symbol value,
        expression is symbol,
        timestamp is t,
        last-value is value from last cell display refresh (only works for atoms)

