1) Compilation environments.  There is no distinction being made between
the local environment and the foreign one.  This will cause problems as
more and more code is compiled on the lambda side.  The three ways to deal
with this are:

  a)  Fix the compiler to maintain a distinction between the two environments.
      Exactly the right distinction to draw is a research issue; fortunately
      it's not critical to get it right, but just to solve the worst screw cases.
      Constant values, macro definitions, and special declarations are most
      common in my experience.  Flavors too, but they probably wouldn't be an
      issue, at least until things get far enough along they can be compiled on
      the K anyway.

  b)  Copy the package hierarchy.  My experience is that this is a lot of work
      and rapidly gets confusing.  It is, however effective.

  c)  Get the compiler hosted on the K machine as rapdily as possible, so the
      minimum amount of cross-compilation is needed.

I think it's obvious that C is the biggest win.  B, or A+B, are definitely needed
for trying to do software development before you have the hardware, but that doesn't
apply here.

A should still be done, for the sake of ongoing software development.
(This means after the porting is pretty well done, at the earliest) .

2)  Constants seem to not be evaluated at compile time.  Possibly this was
done to ensure they have the right value on the K side.  This should be fixed
after the compiler is moved to the K.

3)  OK, how do we clean up the pending OPEN frames on a branch?  Instead of
PDLLVL hair, we should have OPEN-counting, and invoke a routine to clean up
the stack on a branch.

4)  There's no way to patch the cold load.

5)  The debugger gives no indication that you're in KBUG instead of KBUG2.

6)  There's no clean way to boot once you're in KBUG from KBUG2.  c-Abort
will leave you back in KBUG.

7)  Loading files is slower than it should be because of the lack of buffering.
Jim O'Dell is considering fixing this.

8) The Lambda compiler doesn't handle lambda!

(defun foo (x l)
  (del (lambda (ignore x) (eq x 'foo)) nil l))

This recurses infinitely, regardless of whether you use #' or not.

I fixed this by giving LAMBDA a kludge P1 property.  My fix works, and it's even
clean, except it is very weird having an anonymous LAMBDA rewrite into a FLET,
instead of the other way around!

9)  There's no patch system for K changes.  If you change a file, everybody has
to recompile that file every time they reboot.  Very inefficient.

10)  I don't know how multiple-values are *really* supposed to compile.  Where does
value 0 go?  R0?  *RETURN-0*?

11)  What is the DEST when *M-V-TARGET* is MULTIPLE-VALUE-LIST?  Does it assume
D-PDL for this?  If so, it will need some massaging.  If it's the destination for
the list, then my changes to P2ANDOR should work fine.
