-*- Text -*-

(60)

(59) "I defined two kbd macros.  When I did M-X name kbd macro, I typed esc n
     for the first, and then I defined another and hung it on the same key,
     typing M-n this time (I forgot to use my meta key the first time).  Well,
     now esc n gets me one, and M-n the other."

(58) M-% should be bound to m-X Query Replace

(57) If you have a file called MAIN.LSP in your home directory, and start up a
     NIL and do Find File on that file, you'll get the right version number in
     your modeline, but the file's text won't be read in.

(56) When STEVE says *done* it seems to eat a character.  It should
     UNTYI it if it isn't a space -- like EMACS does.

(55) Missing: m-X Evaluate Buffer

(53) M-X insert-file leaves a return (blank line) at the beginning of the
     buffer (before the text inserted) even when the buffer inserted into
     was empty.

(52) ( should not be a delimiter in text mode

(51) M-X Set Key seems to read its command names in the package that
     is set by M-X Reparse Attribute List.  It seems like it should
     always default to the STEVE package, or at least show you what
     package it's in.

(50) Mail buffer doesn't start up in text mode

(49) C-X C-F sys$sylogin: gets a wta error in fs:parse-vms-pathname-hack-device

(48) one can't include a return in a replace string argument, even if one tries
     to quote it with ^Q, which doesn't work anyway.

(47) If you should do a C-X M iwhen already in the process of sending mail,
     Steve happily destroys your previous message.

(46) line wraparound confuses list walker

(45) c-X c-F fails to get a more recent version from the disk, if that
     file is currently being visited.  Diagnosis:  no record is kept of the
     version number of the file in a buffer.

(44) c-U c-L redisplays the Nth line in the top window even when the
     cursor is on the Nth line in the bottom window

(41) (query) replace does not preserve case

(40) remind user about unsaved buffers when exiting nil

(39) Fucked up hardware tabs screw up everything!

(38) In two window mode, c-X B and c-m-Z select the other window if it
     is displaying the desired buffer.  It should bring a copy into the
     current window.

(36) There is a problem with the reverse-video feature. If there is
     a failing I-search for a long string near the begining of the
     screen, the whole screen is reversed. Most ugly.

(35) Comments mess up indentation. In fact any non-parenthsized s-expr may.

(34) c-m-U loses a lot

(32) multiple line searches (ha ha)

(29) Nonexistent m-Q

(28) Dired E gets explicit version number so can't save easily

(26) Redisplay needs to be rewritten to do better terminal handling

(25) ^U, auto-arg, and bit prefixes freeze redisplay!!!
     and no timeout stuff for "M-" "C-M-" and "C-X-" prompts

(24) minibuffer area should be a window (i.e. all the WITH-...)

(21) c-X c-F lets you start editing a new file in a nonexistent directory

(13) there is no concept of a region or the mark being "activated"

(9) can't have buffer w/o an associated file

(8) c-s doesn't echo typeahead chars until after they are found
    (but neither does EMACS)

(6) reparse attribute list looks at file not buffer
