; -*- mode:text; -*-
;List of implemented hooks for the NIL editor.
;

*display-matching-paren*
        Just as in emacs.

*lisp-listener*
        When non-null this makes a close paren which matches a paren in column
zero evaluate the defun and print the result into the buffer.

LISP-INDENT property
        When non-null should be a function of three arguments (bp type count)
which returns a column to indent the (bp-line bp). TYPE is generally
the first atom in the list which contains the beginning  of the line.
It may be 'DEFUN-DEFAULT (if not inside a list.) The COUNT is the number of
s-expressions in the list before the beginning of this line.
Currently defined lisp-indent properties are: null-indentor (0 column always)
defun-indentor (indent second line like defun) and default-indentor
which indents correctly for progn (and most other LISP functions).

*define-search*
        Controls the behavior of GLOBAL DEFUN SEARCH. When null only
the loaded buffers are searched. When non-null any FBOUND atoms will
be handled specially. It tries to find the source file by doing
(WHEREIS function-name) and grovelling around. If the source file is
found, it will be loaded (find-file) and the function definition found in it.

*buffer-name-completion-on-return*
        When set non-null the buffer-name-reader will complete on RETURN.
This makes it difficult to create buffers with names that are a prefix
of some existing buffer name.

*editor-device-mode*
        Passall mode is controled by this flag. When passall mode is
T there is no interrupt character at all. When passall mode is NIL
the keys control-c control-o control-t control-x and control-y are
trapped by VMS for special functions, thus making them unusable as editor
keys.

*single-space-sentance-delimiter*
        When non-null only one space is needed to delimit a sentance.

*paragraph-text-style*
        When non-null a non-empty line beginning with a white space
character begins a paragraph. Otherwise only blank lines do.
