           <<<<<<<< Welcome to the STEVE tutorial. >>>>>>>>

STEVE commands generally involve the CONTROL key (sometimes labeled
CTRL or CTL) and the META key (sometimes labeled EDIT or PAUSE).
Rather than write out META or CONTROL each time we want you to prefix
a character, we'll use the following abbreviations:

 c-<chr>   means hold the CONTROL key while typing the character <chr>
            Thus, c-F would mean hold the CONTROL key and type F.
 m-<chr>   means hold the META key down while typing <chr>.  If there
            is no META key, type <ALT>, release it, then type the
            character <chr>.  "<ALT>" stands for the key labeled
            ALT, ALTMODE, ESC, or ESCAPE.
 c-m-<chr> means hold both the CONTROL and META keys down while typing
            <chr>.  If there is no META key type c-Z followed by <chr>.

NOTE:  If you need to exit at some point, type c-m-Z (or c-Z Z)
       The characters ">>" at the left margin indicate directions for
       you to try using a command, so...
>>  Now type c-V (View next screen) to move to the next screen.

From now on, you'll be expected to do this whenever you finish reading
the screen.  Note that there is an overlap when going from screen to
screen; this provides some continuity when moving through the file.

The first thing that you need to know is how to move around from
place to place in the file.  You already know how to move forward a
screen, with c-V.  To move backwards a screen, type m-V (depress the
META key and type V, or type <ALT>V if you don't have a META key).

>>  Try typing m-V and then c-V to move back and forth a few times.


SUMMARY
-------

The following commands are useful for viewing screenfuls:

        c-V     Move forward one screenful
        m-V     Move backward one screenful
        c-L     Clear screen and redisplay everything
                 putting the text near the cursor at the center.

>> Find the cursor and remember what text is near it.
   Then type a c-L.   Now notice what text it is near.

BASIC CURSOR CONTROL
--------------------

Getting from screenful to screenful is useful, but how do you
reposition yourself within a given screen to a specific place?  There
are several ways you can do this.  One way (not the best, but the most
basic) is to use the commands previous, backward, forward and next.  As
you can imagine these commands (which are given to STEVE as c-P, c-B,
c-F, and c-N respectively) move the cursor from where it currently is
to a new place in the given direction.  Here, in a more graphical form
are the commands:
                          Previous line, c-P
                                  :
                                  :
   Backward, c-B .... Current cursor position .... Forward, c-F
                                  :
                                  :
                          Next line, c-N

You'll probably find it easy to think of these by letter.  P for
previous, N for next, B for backward and F for forward.  These are
the basic cursor positioning commands and you'll be using them ALL
the time so it would be of great benefit if you learn them now.

>> Do a few c-N's to bring the cursor down to this line.

>> Move into the line with some c-F's and then up with a few c-P's.
   See what c-P does when the cursor is in the middle of the line?

In text files, lines are separated by a pair of characters, a Return
and a Linefeed, but STEVE makes them look like one character.  You can
think of it as a single "Newline" character.

>> Try to c-B at the beginning of a line.  Do a few more c-B's.
   Then do c-F's back to the end of the line and beyond.

When you go off the top or bottom of the screen, the text beyond
the end is shifted onto the screen so that your instructions can
be carried out while keeping the cursor on the screen.

>> Try to move the cursor off the bottom of the screen with c-N and
   see what happens.

If moving by characters is too slow, you can move by words.
m-F (Meta-F) moves forward a word and m-B moves back a word.

>> Type a few m-F's and m-B's.  Intersperse them with c-F's and c-B's.

Notice the parallel between c-F and c-B on the one hand, and m-F and
m-B on the other hand.  Very often Meta characters are used for
operations related to English text whereas Control characters operate
on the basic textual units that are independent of what you are
editing (characters, lines, etc).  There is a similar parallel between
lines and sentences: c-A and c-E move to the beginning or end of a
line, and m-A and m-E move to the beginning or end of a sentence.

>> Type a couple of c-A's, and then a couple of c-E's.
   Type a couple of m-A's, and then a couple of m-E's.

See how repeated c-A's do nothing, but repeated m-A's keep moving
farther back.  Do you think that this is right?

Two other simple cursor motion commands are m-< (Meta Less-than), which
moves to the beginning of the file, and m-> (Meta Greater-than), which
moves to the end of the file.  You probably shouldn't try them now,
since finding this spot again would be tedious.  If you need the shift
key to type a "<", then you must also use the shift key to type m-<.
Otherwise, you would be typing m-, (Meta Comma) rather than m-<.

The location of the cursor in the text is also called "point".  To
paraphrase, the cursor shows on the screen where point is located in
the text.

Here is a summary of simple moving operations including the word and
sentence moving commands:

        c-F     Move forward a character
        c-B     Move backward a character

        m-F     Move forward a word
        m-B     Move backward a word

        c-N     Move to next line
        c-P     Move to previous line

        c-A     Move to beginning of line
        c-E     Move to end of line

        m-A     Move back to beginning of sentence
        m-E     Move forward to end of sentence

        m-<     Go to beginning of file
        m->     Go to end of file

>> Try all of these commands now a few times for practice.
   The last two will take you away from this screen, but
   you can come back here with m-V's and c-V's.

LISP S-EXPRESSION COMMANDS
--------------------------

Since you are presumably using STEVE to edit Lisp code, here are some
commands that are useful for moving over s-expressions.  They work a
something like the sentence commands.

        c-m-F   Move forward one s-expression
        c-m-B   Move backward one s-expression

>> Try them.  Move down to the following sample function and move
   around with c-m-F and c-m-B.  Also try the character and word
   commands you have learned.

;;; Given two ordered list of numbers representing sets,
;;; return their intersection

(defun set-intersection (set1 set2)
  (if (or (null set1) (null set2))    ;For the trivial case
      nil                             ;return the empty set
    (let ((n1 (car set1))
          (n2 (car set2)))
      (cond ((= n1 n2)
               (cons n1 (set-intersection (cdr set1) (cdr set2))))
            ((< n1 n2)
               (set-intersection (cdr set1) set2))
            (:else
               (set-intersection set1 (cdr set2)))))))

ARGUMENTS
---------

Like all other commands in STEVE, these commands can be given arguments
which cause them to be executed repeatedly.  The way you give a command
a repeat count is by typing c-U and then the digits before you type the
command.  If you have a META key, you can omit the c-U if you hold down
the META key while you type the digits.  This is easier, but we will
demonstrate the c-U method because it works on any terminal.

For instance, c-U 8 c-F moves forward eight characters.

>> Try giving a suitable argument to c-N or c-P to come as close
   as you can to this line in one jump.

The only apparent exception to this rule of thumb is the screen moving
commands, c-V and m-V.  When given an argument, they scroll the screen
up or down by that many lines, rather than screenfuls.  This proves to
be much more useful.

>> Try typing c-U 8 c-V now.

Did it scroll the screen up by 8 lines?  If you would like to
scroll it down you can give an argument to m-V.

By itself, c-U is called the "universal argument."  It is a shortcut
for giving an argument of four, just as though you had typed c-U 4.
Each susequent c-U multiplies the argument by four.  For instance,
c-U c-U c-N would move the cursor down 16 lines.


CANCELLING COMMANDS
-------------------

In EMACS, c-G is an interrupt character which aborts the current
command.  In STEVE, you can only use c-G to discard a numeric argument
or the beginning of a command that you don't want to finish typing.
If you type an <ALT> by mistake, you can get rid of it with a c-G too.

>> Type c-U 100 to make a numeric arg of 100, then type c-G.
   Now type c-F.  How many characters does it move?

If you type <ALT> <ALT>, you get into something known as a
"minibuffer".  That is an advanced feature of STEVE.  We mention it
now only to say that you can get out of it by typing the Lisp
expression, (RETURN).

NOTE:  Because STEVE must run with "passall" mode enabled, c-C and c-Y
       interrupts are disabled, so it is currently not possible to
       recover if STEVE is in an infinite loop.

INSERTING AND DELETING
----------------------

If you want to type text, just do it.  Characters which you can see,
such as A, 7, *, etc. are taken by STEVE as text and inserted
immediately.  Pressing the <Return> key inserts the "Newline" character
that we mentioned above.

You can delete the last character you typed by typing <Rubout>.
<Rubout> is a key on the keyboard, which may be labeled "Delete"
instead of "Rubout" on some terminals.  More generally, <Rubout>
deletes the character immediately before the current cursor position.

>> Do this now, type a few characters and then delete them
   by typing <Rubout> a few times.  Don't worry about this file
   being changed; you won't affect the master tutorial.  This is just
   a copy of it.

>> Now start typing text until you reach the right margin, and keep
   typing.  When a line of text gets too big for one line on the
   screen, the line of text is "continued" onto a second screen line.
   The exclamation mark at the right margin indicates a line which has
   been continued.

>> Use <Rubout>s to delete the text until the line fits on one screen
   line again.  The continuation line goes away.

>> Move the cursor to the beginning of a line and type <Rubout>.  This
   deletes the line separator before the line and merges the line onto
   the previous line.  The resulting line may be too long to fit, in
   which case it has a continuation line.

>> Type <Return> to insert a "Newline" again.

Remember that most STEVE commands can be given a repeat count;  Note
that this includes characters which insert themselves.

>>  Try that now -- type c-U 8 * and see what happens.

You've now learned the most basic way of typing something in
STEVE and correcting errors.  You can delete by words or lines
as well.  Here is a summary of the delete operations:

        <Rubout>     delete the character just before the cursor
        c-D          delete the next character after the cursor

        m-<Rubout>   kill the word immediately before the cursor
        m-D          kill the next word after the cursor

        c-K          kill from the cursor position to end of line
        m-K          kill to the end of the current sentence

Notice that <Rubout> and c-D, and m-<Rubout> and m-D extend the parallel
started by c-F and m-F (well, <Rubout> isn't really a control
character, but let's not worry about that).  Similarly, we can draw a
parallel between c-K and m-K like we did with c-E and m-E.

Now suppose you kill something, and then you decide that you want to
get it back?  Well, whenever you kill something bigger than a
character, STEVE saves it for you.  To "yank" it back, use c-Y.  Note
that you don't have to be in the same place to do c-Y.  This is a good
way to move text around.  Generally, the commands that can destroy a lot
of text save it, while the ones that attack only one character, or
nothing but blank spaces, do not save anything.

Note that a single c-K kills the contents of the line, and a second
c-K kills the line itself, and make all the other lines move up.  If
you give c-K a repeat count, it kills that many lines AND their
contents.  So, c-U 1 c-K is like typing c-K c-K; c-U 2 c-K is like
typing c-K four times, etc.

>> Type c-N a couple times to move the cursor down to some line you
   don't like, and then kill that line with c-K.

The text that has just disappeared is saved so that you can
retrieve it.  To retrieve the last killed text and put it where
the cursor currently is, type c-Y.

>> Try it; type c-Y to yank the text back.

You could think of c-Y as if you were yanking something back that
someone took away from you.  Notice that if you do several c-K's
in a row the text that is killed is all saved together so that one
c-Y will yank all of the lines.

>> Do this now, type c-K several times.

Now retrieve that killed text:

>> Type c-Y.  Then move the cursor down a few lines and type c-Y
   again.  You now see how you can copy some text to another place.

What do you do if you have some text you want to yank back, and then
you kill something else?  c-Y would yank the more recent kill.  But
fortunately the previous text is not lost.  You can get back to it
using the m-Y command.  After you have done c-Y to get the most recent
kill, typing m-Y replaces that yanked text with the previous kill.
Typing m-Y again and again brings in earlier and earlier kills.  When
you have reached the text you are looking for, you can just go away
and leave it there.  If you m-Y enough times, you come back to the
starting point (the most recent kill).  This is because the kills are
saved in a circular list called the "kill ring."

>> Kill a line, move around, kill another line.
   Then do c-Y to get back the second killed line.
   Then do m-Y and it will be replaced by the first killed line.
   Do more m-Y's and see what you get.  Keep doing them until
   the second kill line comes back, and then a few more.

FILES
-----

In order to make the text you edit permanent, you must put it in a
file.  Otherwise, it will go away when your NIL is terminated (by
typing (QUIT) to the Lisp listener, for instance).  To select a file
for editing, you "find" the file.  What this means is that you
load the contents of the file in your STEVE.  Loosely speaking, what
you are editing is the file itself.  However, the changes still don't
become permanent until you "save" the file.  This is so you can have
control to avoid leaving a half-changed file around when you don't
want to.  Even then, STEVE really makes a new version of the file and
doesn't change the old version at all (so that you can verify or throw
away your changes later if you like).

If you look near the botton of the screen you will see a line that
begins with "STEVE TEACH (TEXT) TEACH.TXT" followed by your home
directory and the name of your machine.  This is the name of your own
temporary copy of the text of the STEVE tutorial; the file you are now
visiting.  Whatever file you edit, that file's name will appear in
that precise spot.  The word "TEACH" between "STEVE" and "(TEXT)" is
the name of the current buffer.

The commands for loading and saving files are unlike the other
commands you have learned in that they consist of two characters.
They both start with the character Control-X.  There is a whole series
of commands that start with Control-X; many of them have to do with
files, buffers, and related things, and all of them consist of
Control-X followed by some other character.  To start editing a file
you would type

        c-X c-F   Find a file (i.e. load it into STEVE)

STEVE will then ask you for the file name.  You should end the name
with the <Return> key.  After this command, you will see the contents
of the file in your STEVE.  You can edit the contents.  When you wish
to make the changes permanent, issue the command

        c-X c-S   Save the file

A new version of the file will be created.  When the operation is
finished, STEVE prints the name and version saved.  You should save
fairly often, so that you will not lose very much work if the system
should crash.

MULTIPLE BUFFERS
----------------

Most editors only let you edit one file at a time, but STEVE lets you
edit any number of files simultaneously.  Each has its own "buffer"
which you can refer to by name.  You can see a list of all the buffers
by typing

        c-X c-B   List loaded buffers

>> Do this now.  When you have finished looking at the list, type a
   <Space> to make the list go away.

As you saw, there are currenly two buffers in your STEVE, "TEACH", the
one you are now editing, and "Main".  You can select another buffer
by typing

        c-X B     Select buffer

It will then ask you for the name of the buffer to select, showing the
default in parenthesis.  If this is the buffer you want to can simply
press <return> to select it.

>> Try selecting the "Main" buffer by typing c-X B followed by <return>
   Then return to this tutorial the same way.  See how the default
   changes?  It assumes that you want to return the most recently
   selected buffer.

To make a new file, just load (find) it "as if" it already existed.
Then start typing in the text.  When you ask to "save" the file, STEVE
will really create the file with the text that you have inserted.  So
you can think of this as editing an already existing file.

>>  Try this.  "Find" a (new) file named FOO.  Type some text into it
    and save it.  Then return to this tutorial using c-X B.  (Later,
    when you are back at the VMS command level, you can verify that
    the file is actually there)

EXTENDING THE COMMAND SET
-------------------------

There are many, many more STEVE commands than could possibly be put
on all the control and meta characters.  STEVE gets around this with
the X (eXtend) command.  This comes in two flavors:

        c-X     Character eXtend.  Followed by one character.
        m-X     Named command eXtend.  Followed by a long name.

These are commands that are generally useful but used less than the
commands you have already learned about.  You have already seen two
of them: the file commands c-X c-V to Visit and c-X c-S to Save.
Another example is the command to tell STEVE that you'd
like to stop editing.  The command to do this is c-X c-Z.

There are many c-X commands.  The ones you need immediately are:

        c-X c-F         Find file.
        c-X c-S         Save file.
        c-X c-B         List buffers
        c-X B           Select buffer
        c-X c-Z         Quit to VMS.  This does NOT save your file.
                        If you don't plan on returning to NIL, save
                        your file first by typing c-X c-S.

You probably want to go back to a Lisp Listener rather than VMS, so

        c-m-Z           Quit to Lisp

is preferable to c-X c-Z.

Named eXtend commands are commands which are used even less
frequently, or commands which are used only in certain modes.  These
commands are usually called "functions".  An example the function
Replace String which globally replaces one string with another.  When
you type m-X, STEVE prompts you at the bottom of the screen with
m-X and you should type the name of the function you wish to call; in
this case, "Replace".  Just type "repl<ALT>" and STEVE will complete
the name.  Then you type the string that you want to replace,
an <ALT>, the string you want to replace it with, and a return.
When the <ALT> is echoed, it looks like this: $

>> Move the cursor to the blank line two lines below this one.
   Then type m-X repl<ALT>changed<ALT>altered<Return>.

   Notice how this line has changed: you've replaced
   the word C H A N G E D with "altered" wherever it occurs
   after the cursor.


THE MODE LINE
-------------

The "echo area" contains the bottom three lines of the screen.  The
line immediately above them is called the MODE LINE.  The mode line
might say something like

   STEVE MAIN (LISP) MAIN.LSP[YOURNAME]USRD$:YOURMACHINE:: (1) *

This is a very useful "information" line.

The star means that you have made changes to the text.  Right after
you find or save a file, there is no star.

The part of the mode line inside the parentheses is to tell you what
modes you are in.  The default mode is LISP (of course).  It is an
example of a "major mode".  There are several major modes in STEVE for
editing other languages and text, such as BLISS mode, Text mode, etc.
At any time one and only one major mode is active, and its name can
always be found in the mode line just where "TEXT" is now.  Each major
mode makes a few commands behave differently.  For example, there are
commands for creating comments in a program, and since each
programming language has a different idea of what a comment should
look like, each major mode has to insert comments differently.  Each
major mode is the name of an extended command, which is how you get
into the mode.  For example, m-X Fundamental Mode is how to get into
Fundamental mode.

If you are going to be Lisp code should probably use Lisp Mode.

>> Type m-X Lisp Mode<Return>.

Don't worry, none of the commands you have learned changes in any
great way.  But you can now observe that periods are now part of words
when you do m-F or m-B, and <tab> behaves differently.  You might want
to go back to the sample Lisp function above and notice how <tab>
indents lines to make the code look "pretty printed."  Major modes are
usually like that:  commands don't change into completely unrelated
things, but they work a little bit differently.


SEARCHING
---------

STEVE can do searches for strings (these are groups of contiguous
characters or words) either forward through the file or backward
through it.  To search for the string means that you are trying to
locate it somewhere in the file and have STEVE show you where the
occurrences of the string exist.  This type of search is somewhat
different from what you may be familiar with.  It is a search that is
performed as you type in the thing to search for.  The command to
initiate a search is c-S for forward search, and c-R for reverse
search.  BUT WAIT!  Don't do them now.  When you type c-S you'll
notice that the string "I-search" appears as a prompt in the echo
area.  This tells you that STEVE is in what is called an incremental
search waiting for you to type the thing that you want to search for.
A search is terminated by <ALT>.

>> Now type c-S to start a search.  SLOWLY, one letter at a time,
   type the word 'cursor', pausing after you type each
   character to notice what happens to the cursor.
>> Type c-S to find the next occurrence of "cursor".
>> Now type <Rubout> four times and see how the cursor moves.
>> Type <ALT> to terminate the search.

Did you see what happened?  STEVE, in an incremental search, tries to
go to the occurrence of the string that you've typed out so far.  To go
to the next occurrence of 'cursor' just type c-S again.  If no such
occurrence exists STEVE beeps and tells you that it is a failing
search.  c-G would also terminate the search.

If you are in the middle of an incremental search and type <Rubout>,
you'll notice that the last character in the search string is erased
and the search backs up to the last place of the search.  For
instance, suppose you currently have typed 'cu' and you see that your
cursor is at the first occurrence of 'cu'.  If you now type <Rubout>,
the 'u' on the search line is erased and you'll be repositioned in the
text to the occurrence of 'c' where the search took you before you
typed the 'u'.  This provides a useful means for backing up while you
are searching.

If you are in the middle of a search and happen to type a control
character (other than a c-S or c-R, which tell STEVE to search for the
next occurrence of the string), the search is terminated.

The c-S starts a search that looks for any occurrence of the search
string AFTER the current cursor position.  But what if you want to
search for something earlier in the text?  To do this one should
type c-R for Reverse search.  Everything that applies to c-S applies
to c-R except that the direction of the search is reversed.


GETTING MORE HELP
-----------------

In this tutorial we have tried to supply just enough information to
get you started using STEVE.  There is so much available in STEVE that
it would be difficult to explain it all here.  However, you may want
to learn more about STEVE since it has numerous desirable features
that you don't know about yet.  STEVE has a great deal of internal
documentation.  All of these commands can be accessed through the HELP
character

        c-m-?   Help command

To use the HELP features, type c-m-?, and then a character saying what
kind of help you want.  If you are REALLY lost, type c-m-? followed by
a ? character, and STEVE will tell you what kinds of help it can give.
If you have typed c-m-Z and decide you don't want any help, just type
c-G to abort.

The most basic HELP feature is c-m-? C.  Type c-m-?, a C, and a
command character, and STEVE prints a description of the command.
When you are finished reading it, type a <Space> to bring your text
back on the screen.

>> Type c-m-? C followed by c-S.  (Don't be alarmed when it says
   "Reading File..."  It is only loading the help file.)  When you
   are finished reading the output, type a <Space>.  The message should
   be something like

Control-S (Incremental Search)
                Control-S searches for a string, terminated by Altmode.
                It seaches as you type.  *Note Control-S: Search
Done.

Multi-character commands such as c-X c-Z and (if you have no META or key)
<ALT>V are also allowed after c-m-? C.

Here are some other useful HELP options:

   c-m-? D      Describe a function.  You type in the name of the
                function.  (To see your text again when it is done,
                type a <Space>)

   c-m-? A      Apropos.  Type in a keyword and STEVE will (try to) list
                all the functions containing that keyword.  For some
                functions it will also list a one or two character
                command which has the same effect.

NOTE:  The help facility facility in STEVE is not yet complete.
       c-m-? C is the only option that works half-way reliably.
       We apologize for this.  Please consult the NIL Manual for
       further documentation.


CONCLUSION
----------

This tutorial is meant to be understandable to new users, so if
you found something unclear, don't sit and blame yourself--send us
a letter telling us what you found troublesome.
