--  draft ---

Hardware to support Critical Sections.

   Correct operation requires that the system transition directly from
one "legal" state directly to another "legal" state, as "seen" from the
garbage collector. (Legal states are those in which all storage conventions are obeyed.)
Obviously, unless this is true, the garbage collector scavenger might "encounter"
an incorrectly formatted object, with unpredictable and probably fatal results
for the system.

   A key aspect of this dictum is what it means to be "seen".  The Lambda,
for example, does not employ "coersive" scheduling at the microcode level.
Therefore, a microcode sequence can potentially be coded in confidence it
will not be possible to interrupt out of the middle (however, if certain things
are done, such as doing a transported read memory access, there will be
a possibility of "gc-visibility").  The Falcon employs coercive scheduling,
so the possibilities for lossage are much greater, and in fact, the problems
are completely inadequately dealt with by the FLEABIT software design.
The hardware support proposed here ameloriates these problems, while retaining
the advantages of coercive scheduling (i.e. reduced interrupt latency).

  A second problem concerns "motion" of objects.  Conceptually, objects move
only with a "flip" occurs.  (Flipping involves a process switch to the
garbage-collector process).  Even if the garbage collector
itself operates correctly, it might break an ongoing computation by moving
a piece of data "out from under".  This is a relative rare event, and its scheduling is
relatively loosly coupled (i.e. can be delayed for a short interval without
penality).  However, the actual motion of the object is carried out by the
transporter, whose execution is tightly coupled to the ongoing process.

  Now if all pointers employed by the computation
are strictly "kosher" at all times, the problem does not exist since the pointers
will be updated by the garbage collection process when the object gets moved.
However, it may not be feasible or efficient to avoid the momentary existance of
non kosher pointers, particularily in places like the VMA.  Having a more uniformly
typed machine (such as the 40bitter as compared to the 32 bit) ameleoriates these
problems but does not necessarily eliminate them.

  A section of code which is "embarrissing" from this point of view is termed
a "critical" section.  [This term is also used in discussions of multi-process
interlocking. The two situations are similar, properly interpreted]

  The UNBOXED-LOCATIVE (pretty-much) non-solution

  The FLEABIT approaches some of these problems by introducing the UNBOXED-LOCATIVE
datatype, the idea being that it is a "pointer" to data, which, however, is unboxed.
This approaches the scavenger side of the problem; the scavenger simply doesnt look
past such a pointer.  As long as there exists in the system at least one other pointer
to the same object, the object will get "saved".  The remaining problem is
relocating the UNBOXED-LOCATIVE if the object it points to gets moved.


*allow-sequence-break*
