Specification for Project

Name:   Porting the Common LISP test suite to the Falcon

Date:   9/30/88

Participants:   K. Corbett, D. Saslav

Est. Work:      Two-four days

Project Status: Under review

Purpose:        The goal of this project is to ensure the existence of as complete and correct an implementation of the Common LISP specification for the Falcon as possible; the purpose of this specification is to give an overview of existing regression tests, hopefully suggesting a resource allocation scheme that will afford maximal Common LISP testing without causing an undue strain on concurrent programming efforts.

Description:    This project entails the review and revision of a number of Lambda functions which have been devised for testing Common LISP on the Lambda.  In the Lambda version of the test suite, various interpreting, display, logging, and automating mechanisms surround examples of Common LISP code which have been compiled as examples of, and deviations from the 1985 specification of Common LISP, as set forth by Guy Steele in Common LISP, the Language.  We hope to use these mechanisms along with a more complete set of tests to run relatively complete regression tests on the Falcon implementations of Common LISP routines.

        Attached are two lists, the first of Common LISP topics which are accounted for to some extent in existing test files.  The second attachment represents topics not addressed by the existing Test Suite.  For all entries in the second list, validation tests need to be written.

Procedure:      This project requires detailed analysis and potential revision of the various utilities employed by the Common LISP test suite; in each case, all LISP functions must be guaranteed to be Falcon-compatible.  The utilities involved may be classified into four categories:

        1.      LISP-Interpreting Mechanisms
        These are the LISP functions which actually run (i.e., evaluate or compile) the examples in a test suite.

        2.      Display Mechanisms
        These are interactive stream macros used to display the results of individual Common LISP tests on the screen for immediate view by the programmer running the test suite.

        3.      Logging/Database Mechanisms
        These are file stream macro accessors and constructors, used to record the results of sequences of Common LISP tests for statistical examination by the Common LISP tester.

        4.      Automating Mechanisms
        These are the mechanisms which have been devised for automating the process of running, displaying, and logging the results of Common LISP tests.

Assessment:     It would appear that roughly 50% of the nearly 800 Common LISP identifiers currently have adequate regression tests.  Given a knowledge of the underlying issues involved in observing correct behavior in Common LISP behavior, tests could be written for the majority of the remaining areas. Clearly, a complete test bed is out of the question; however, careful prioritizing of the test subjects could result in expeditious test-writing, covering a great deal of the remaining areas, in the time given at the beginning of this report.










































        Attachment I:   Areas Covered by Common LISP Test Suite

        This list represents Common LISP topics covered by the current Common LISP test suite, found in the following files:

        "VALID:VALID-TESTS;TESTS1.LISP"
        "VALID:VALID-TESTS;TESTS2.LISP"
        "VALID:VALID-TESTS;TESTS3-NUMER.LISP"
        "VALID:VALID-TESTS;TESTS4GSI.LISP"

                Identity Functions

                Environment Inquiries

Software Parameter Inquiries
Hardware Parameter Inquiries


                Debugging Tools

                Code Documentation

                Time Functions

                Input/Output

Printed Representations
Read
Parsing
Macro Characters
Standard Dispatching Macro Character Syntax
The Readtable
Print
Input Functions
Character Streams
Binary Streams
Output Functions
Output to Character Streams
Output to Binary Streams
Formatted Output to Character Streams
Querying the User

                Lists

Conses
Lists
Alteration of List Structure
Substitution of Expressions
Using Lists as Sets
Association Lists

                Hash Tables

Hash Table Functions
Primitive Hash Function

                Arrays

Creation
Access
Information
Bit-Array Functions
Fill Pointers
Dimension Changing

                Characters

Attributes
Predicates
Construction
Selection
Conversions
Control-Bit Functions

                Numbers

Predicates
Comparisons
Trigonometric Functions
Constants Provided

                Macros

Macro Definition
Macro Expansion

                Predicates

Logical Operators

                Control Structure

Function Invocation
Simple Sequencing
Conditionals
Blocks and Exits
Iteration, Indefinite and General
Iteration, Simple Constructs
Mapping
The "Program Feature"
Multiple Values
Dynamic Non-local Exits






                Forms

Function Calls
Named Functions
Lambda Expressions
Top-level Forms
Declaring Global Variables and Named Constants

                Type Specifiers

Coercion

                Structures

Defstruct
        make-...
Unnamed Structures
Named Structures

                Miscellaneous Tests, found in the file:
                "VALID:VALID-TESTS;MISCELLANEOUS.LISP"
                (The following list represent tests of individual functions; in order to complete testing for the governing topic, further regression test writing is warranted.  The containing categories for the functions in this list appear in "Attachment II: Areas Not Covered by Common LISP Test Suite,..." pending the construction of more thorough test sequences for each topic)

keywordp
locally
psetq
alphanumericp
alpha-char-p
byte-position
byte-size
byte
ash
boole

















        Attachment II:  Areas Not Covered by Common LISP Test Suite,                    with Estimates of Time Required to Create Them

        The topics listed below are not necessarily all strictly "testable".  Many have deep-rooted ramifications and can only really be tested through repeated use and over long periods of time.  For the purposes of this specification, this list represents chapter and section headings in the table of contents of Steele, Common LISP, the Language, all listed functions in which are not represented in the current state of the regression test  suite.

Scope and Extent

Type Specifiers

Forms

Self-evaluating Forms
Variables
Special Forms
Macros
Control of Time of Evaluation

                Predicates

Logical Values
Type Predicates, for Specific Data Types and General
Equality Predicates

                Control Structure

Constants
Variables
Reference
Assignment
Generalized Variables
Establishing New Variable Bindings

                Declarations

Syntax
Specifiers
Type Declaration for Forms

                Symbols

Property Lists
Print Names
Creating New Symbols






                Packages

Consistency Rules
Package Names
Translating Strings to Symbols
Exporting
Importing
Name Conflicts
Built-in Packages
Package System Functions and Variables
Modules

                Numbers

Precision, Contagion, and Coercion
Arithmetic Operations
Irrational Functions
Transcendental Functions
Exponential Functions
Logarhythmic Functions
Complex Functions
Type Conversions
Component Extractions
Logical Operations
Byte Manipulation Functions
Random Numbers

                Sequences

Simple Functions
Concatenation
Mapping
Reduction
Modification
Searching
Sorting
Merging

                Strings

Access
Comparison
Construction
Manipulation










                Structures

Defstruct
        make-...
        Slot Options
        Options
By-Position Constructor Functions
Explicitly Specified Representations
Unnamed Structures
Named Structures

                The Evaluator

Run-time Form Evaluation
The Top-Level Loop

                Streams

Standard Streams
Creation
Operations

                The File System Interface

File Names
Pathnames
Pathname Functions
Opening Files
Closing Files
Renaming Files
Deleting Files
Probing for File Attribute Information
Loading Files
Accessing Directories


                Errors

General Error-Signalling Functions
Specialized Error-Signalling Forms and Macros
Special Forms for Exhaustive Case Analysis

                The Compiler
