        --DRAFT                 DRAFT                   DRAFT--   --rg

        Why we need a new cold loader, how we are going to get it, and what difference
                it will make.


        why we need a new one.

                The current FLEABIT FALCON cold loader has a number of gross structual
  shortcommings.  For example, it makes no list structure at all!
  As a result, things have to go thru two very fragile stages before the package
  system can even be installed.  In the first stage [COLD], no symbols, etc are available
  at all!  This causes simple looking code to fail in strange ways (clobberring NIL),
  etc.  In the next stage [WARM] there is a completely simpleminded INTERN which involves
  a single OBLIST, absolutely no package structure, etc.  Interning things in this way
  can lead to all kinds of screws later (if package inheritance fails to happen, etc etc).
  Finally, when the package system comes up, things have to be hacked grossly to be
  consistant with the multiple extraneous packages, etc which have been introduced in the
  FLEABIT and FLEABIT-COMPILED systems on the lambda.  This obviously needs to be flushed.
  There are a number of other gross deficiencies as well.

        What is the Lambda cold load generator?

                It is two files, one fairly large [sys:cold;coldut] and one medium size
  [sys:cold;coldld].  Mostly COLDUT implements a simple virtual memory on a disk partition.
  Using a disk partition instead of building the cold load in memory allows considerably
  more stuff to be incorporated in the cold load.  This is a simplification since
  then there is less need for the system to run in a "primitive" mode where stuff you
  normally expect to be there isn't.  For example, the lambda cold load has EVAL, the
  package sytem, READ, PRINT and lots of other stuff as well as FASLOAD all there to start.
  The Falcon has only FASLOAD to start, etc.  In other words, it becomes feasible to put
  most of the stuff in the WARM and HOT file lists directly in the cold load.
  (The idea way to make a cold load, BTW, is to load the entire system in a separate
  MOBY section.  That would truly avoid "primitive" modes)
                The lambda, of course, builds extensive list structure at cold load
  time which becomes part of the cold load, avoiding numerous problems.
                The virtual memory system of the FLEABIT-compiled system is seriously
  wedged in various ways.  Fixing this without breaking everything would be a royal pain.
  On the other hand, the virtual memory system of the lambda is perfectly adequate
  in principle (of course, a fair number of details need modification).  It "sort of"
  comes for free along with the cold load generator.

        What needs modification to make the base lambda cold load generator suitable
                for the FALCON?
        The concern of the cold load generator is entirely with data structures.
  In other words it is greatly concerned with how an array is stored, but cares not
  what the PDL looks like, let alone a stack-group, etc.  So it needs to know about
  simple data types like arrays, CONSes and compiled functions.  The current thought
  (not yet a plan) is to say that the low level conventions used by the FLEABIT are
  for the most part OK for these simple data types.  [The main exception to this I
  am aware of is the need to maintain back pointers to entries in functions in case
  the function gets superceeded.  A minor exception is that the STRUCTURE datatype,
  etc, would be flushed and defstruct turned into arrays exactly as on the Lambda.
  Other suggestions for improvements that people are
  aware of in this area should be voiced, soon if possible, please.]
        An the next level of detail, converting the cold loader to the fleabit
  low level data storage conventions involves generating new QCOM and QDEFS files.
  These files serve as the authoritative, on line reference for much of the storage
  conventions.

        The hope is, the same FBIN format currently used by FLEABIT can also be loaded
  by the cold load generator.  We have a couple of legs up on this, because it does
  currently know how to process QFASL files, which are basically in the same format
 (less several new FASL-OP codes).

  One significant piece of work would be required would be to put PRIMITIVE operations
  into the cross compiler.  I guess I feel the user-level syntax used by the FLEABIT
  is OK, altho it would be interesting if anyone could suggest an improvement.
  Also required is a method to get DEFAFUNs into FBIN files.

        What general stages might things go thru?

        (1)  cold loader grossly forked.  lambda specific stuff flushed etc.
        (2)  parameter files converted.
             [quite straightforward, providing we really do use the FLEABIT data storage
              conventions]
        (3)  ability to load cross-compiled files which contain only data.
        (4)  ability to load cross-compiled files which contain code.
             [this involves design of some new data structure as well as writing a medium
             sized piece of code, the basis of which already exists however]
        (5)  assembling "cold-load" files (using pieces out of FLEABIT where possible)
             [fairly big job.  Array, CONS, etc extracted, de-package-randomized,
             cross compiled, etc.]
        (6)  ability to get cold load from LAMBDA disk partition into FALCON memory.
        (7)  ability to actually start and execute cold load.
        (8)  new debugger interface designed.  Includes ability to step machine and save state.

        more or less at this point, we are theoretically pretty much ready to take whatever code
        has been processed thru to run on the fleabit system and bring it up here.
        In principle, the same FBIN file could be loaded into either system!
        [even package screwwage might not be a problem for new or LAMBDAoid code!]

        Note that we get a long long way into this process before we have to deal with
        control data structure such as pdls or stack-groups.

     Once we accomplish this, how does conversion to the 40 bit machine go?

        Pretty much, nothing having to do with this whole thing is changed.
    If any changes to array formats, etc are made, the corresponding changes
    need to be made here.  Changes on the order of adding tag bits to fixnum
    arrays or code are trivial.  One problem would be access to 40 bit disk files, etc.
    If we have these going by that time on the MAC, this would be a good way to test
    them out.  Once inside the Lambda, practically everything is a bignum anyway so
    32 bits versus 40 makes little difference.




====================

        Datatype by datatype comparision FLEABIT vs new proposals.

  The general assumption above is that data representation (as opposed to control
structure-representation) of the FLEABIT system is OK and can pretty much be
used.   This section will serve to record the blow-by-blow as we attempt to
verify that assumption.  [A few new issues are also being taken up here consistant
with our recent decision to aim 40 bits, etc.  One notable one is to see
how much of a squeeze 5 bit datatypes would be.]

  Much of the detail of this work will be recorded in jb:k.ncold;fqcom.
This file will attempt only to skim the surface.

--Jim

   In the first stage [COLD], no symbols, etc are available
   at all!
   This causes simple looking code to fail in strange ways (clobberring NIL),
   etc.
   In the next stage [WARM] there is a completely simpleminded INTERN which involves
   a single OBLIST, absolutely no package structure, etc.
   Interning things in this way can lead to all kinds of screws later (if
   package inheritance fails to happen, etc etc).  Finally, when the
   package system comes up, things have to be hacked grossly to be
   consistant with the multiple extraneous packages, etc which have been
   introduced in the FLEABIT and FLEABIT-COMPILED systems on the lambda.
   This obviously needs to be flushed.

  The Falcon has only FASLOAD to start, etc.

                The lambda, of course, builds extensive list structure at cold load
  time which becomes part of the cold load, avoiding numerous problems, etc etc.

What does etc. refer to in these sentences?  |||rg:The problems just mentioned previously.|||
||| Jim: There are a whole bunch of etc.'s I don't think you answered the question ||

 There are a number of other gross deficiencies as well.
What exactly are the other gross deficiencies.....  |||rg:I think enuf have been enumerated.
        Many lead from one to another as indicated.  Because of no list structuture
        then packages are eventually screwwed, etc.  The virtual memory system is also
        seriously comprimised because it has to work before lots of things exist.|||

  Mostly COLDUT implements a simple virtual memory on a disk partition.
  Using a disk partition instead of building the cold load in memory allows considerably
  more stuff to be incorporated in the cold load.
What else does it do? |||Rg:all the stuff in WARM and HOT for starters.|||
Jim: WARM and HOT in the K system, I take it. The cold load on the Lambda
     has a lot more stuff in it than the K WARM and HOT files.

  This is a simplification since then there is less need for the system
  to run in a "primitive" mode where stuff you   normally expect to be
  there isn't.
What is stuff in this sentence?  |||RG:SYMBOLP, SPECIAL VARIABLES.||
Jim: SYMBOLP and SPECIAL VARIABLES are the main additions we get from a new
cold loader.

  In other words, it becomes feasible to put
  most of the stuff in the WARM and HOT file lists directly in the cold load.
What from hot and cold can't be put in the cold load?  |||rg: substantually all the stuff|||
Jim: Your two statements contradict one another. FIrst you say you can put
all the stuff in and then you say most of the stuff has to be left out.
I was asking what COULDN'T be put in the cold load?

                The virtual memory system of the FLEABIT-compiled system is seriously
  wedged in various ways.
Why?  |||rg: for one, the prime allocating structures are not easily accessible.
  They exist only in global variable type places and funny operations are required
  to access them.  Without stopping the machine, you can not even locate them in
  main memory.  Also the map entry has two spearate and semi-unrelated fields which
  interact in unclear ways.  (the FRESH bit and the rest of it)|||
Jim: This is a very good explanation of the problem. Thanks!

 Fixing this without breaking everything would be a royal pain.
Why?  |||Rg: it would fundamentally change the whole thing||
I see you mean breaking everything by virture of breaking the low level kernel.
Or fixing it without a major overhaul of Fleabit??

  On the other hand, the virtual memory system of the lambda is perfectly adequate
  in principle (of course, a fair number of details need modification).
What needs modification?  |||RG:  This is being worked out.  Consult jb:k.ncold;fqcom
        for the current state of things|||
Looks like there is a lot of code in there that deals with Communications areas. Will this
code be flushed??

  ;; In the cold-load, random list structure goes in INIT-LIST-AREA, and random structure
  ;; structure goes in WORKING-STORAGE-AREA.  This is done because the cold-load builder
  ;; doesn't support homogeneous list/structure regions.  At some point the cold-load
  ;; builder will be revised to deal with this, and then this crock can go away.  Note
  ;; that there are other places in the lisp system that use INIT-LIST-AREA as an indicator
  ;; of the last fixed area, these will have to be hunted down and dealt with.
Are you going to fix this??

There are references to a-memory in the code, what will you do about those?
Will we have things called FEF's? There seems to reference to self-mapping-table
in this code, doesn't that refer to flavors? There's lots of SG stuff also.

 It "sort of"
  comes for free along with the cold load generator.
What does "sort of" mean here.   |||Rg:The cold load generator also allocates memory
        and has mechanism for doing it.||
Why isn't it really for free then?

  The current thought
  (not yet a plan) is to say that the low level conventions used by the FLEABIT are
  for the most part OK for these simple data types.
  [The main exception to this I
  am aware of is the need to maintain back pointers to entries in functions in case
  the function gets superceeded.  A minor exception is that the STRUCTURE datatype,
  etc, would be flushed and defstruct turned into arrays exactly as on the Lambda.
  Other suggestions for improvements that people are
  aware of in this area should be voiced, soon if possible, please.]
What exceptions are there besides this are you aware of?  ||rg: Current plan is to
retain FLEABIT type codes for the time being.  See comments in NQCOM re which ones
are unused now and which are not planned to be used (altho they will remain allocated),|||

Do you mean FQCOM? Does the F stand for Falcon? Will we generate a new one
for the Phoenix? If not why not KQCOM for the name?

        The hope is, the same FBIN format currently used by FLEABIT can also be loaded
  by the cold load generator.  We have a couple of legs up on this, because it does
  currently know how to process QFASL files, which are basically in the same format
 (less several new FASL-OP codes).
Why is this just a hope? What possible problems could arise?  ||rg: As steve points
out, some compatiblity things will clearly be needed.  Its just a question of how
many it worth bothering with.  In any case, users can be assured that code compiled
with the cross-compiler will run, with at most trivial changes.||

I understand that I just wanted to know what the compatibility issues are?
Why should user level code change ate all?

        (1)  cold loader grossly forked.  lambda specific stuff flushed etc.
Why can't the cold loader be conditionalized?  ||rg:  Its not a good idea||
Jim: Why not?

        (2)  parameter files converted.
Why can't this file be conditionalized?  ||rg: likewise||
Jim: I don't think saying "Its not a good idea, with no supporting data
     is a valid argument in a technical discussion

        (6)  ability to get cold load from LAMBDA disk partition into FALCON memory.
Remember we must address the Macintosh issues here.  ||rg: Initiallly, this is going
  to work via LAMBDA.  However, I will make sure things with Bob get coordinated||
Jim: I think that your document should make mention of what issues need to
be coordinated. What happens if, god forbid, you get hit by a truck?

        (8)  new debugger interface designed.  Includes ability to step machine and save state.
Is this the K equivalent of the LAM program. How will this interact with what Montreal is
doing. Can we give them this piece of work to do?  ||rg: the debugger should be at least as
good.  However, the interface is something we should get done here.  Later, we might consider
having them add to the debugger if we found some stuff where that was appropriate.
For now, all debugging is via LAMBDA (or FALCON when it works well enuf.)  Whether
CORAL is suitable to do something, is an issue we can face later||

Couldn't we write the spec for the interface and have them code it up?

        more or less at this point, we are theoretically pretty much ready to take whatever code
        has been processed thru to run on the fleabit system and bring it up here.
Whats more and whats less and why on theoretically? What other problems might we have?
||rg: this inheritantly depends on how things work out.||
Jim: Do you mean simply that unless we have forgotten some minor problem or that at this
     point there may be major design flaws?

        Pretty much, nothing having to do with this whole thing is changed.
What will have to change EXACTLY??
Jim: You didn't answer this question.

        One problem would be access to 40 bit disk files, etc.
What does etc. mean here?
Jim: You didn't answer this either?
