-*- Mode:Text -*-

                                Proposal

                      Generating Internal Releases

                  (Jim O'Dell / Last modified 11/08/88)



SUMMARY:



This document puts forth the philosophy, definitions, procedure,
and frequency for generating internal Falcon software releases over
the lifetime of Falcon software development.  The goals of
making internal releases are:

 o provision of reliable snapshots of critical project components;
 o early detection of problems incurred by system file changes;
 o accommodation of individual and team project schedules;
 o minimization of required "code freeze" periods;
 o economical disk space usage.

As stated above, the Release mechanism exists partly for taking
snapshots of the Falcon source files upon completion of major
system components.  Sufficiently radical changes to the main
development line could warrant new Releases in and of
themselves; in such a case, all other developers should work to
"the soonest convenient stopping point," thus allowing the
Release process to proceed.  In any event, no more than six
months should ever elapse between two Falcon Releases.



BACKGROUND:



The Falcon system software is currently found in the directory
"JB:K;", and may be referred to by a logical pathname,
"K:<subsystem>;" where <subsystem> takes the form "K-<x>", <x>
being an integer that is to be incremented with each release.

As always, logical pathnames may be redefined by developers
wishing to use a different set of Falcon source and binary
files.

The files in the main line of Falcon system development (only)
are found in the directory "JB:K;".



PROPOSAL:



The proposed release mechanism consists of six parts, each of
which will be discussed in the body of the proposal:

  A. Stating the Release Goals
  B. Incrementing The Release Version Number
  C. Announcing a Code Freeze
  D. Copying the Falcon Source Files
  E. Compiling the Copies
  F. Regression Testing the Compiled Release
  G. Creating a New Falcon System
  H. Substituting Modified Copies Back into the Main Development
     Hierarchy
  I. Archiving Old Falcon Releases


A. Stating the Release Goals


Before any Release of the Falcon System is undertaken, all K
developers must come to terms with exactly which state of the
world they wish to capture in making the release.  This is
accomplished by having each design group (individual or team)
make a formal (i.e., written or ZMailed) statement of the
particular design efforts they wish to complete before the new K
Release is begun.  In this manner, potential problems due to
module incompleteness at the time of the Release may be averted.
For example, a developer involved in making a major revision to
the cross-compiler could request that the state of the Falcon
source files be such that the Release process await a particular
cross-compiler milestone.

Certain criteria should always be met before a new Falcon
Release is undertaken:

  o  All K developers should have arrived at a suitable stopping
     point;
  o  Mega-booting should work.
  o  (Any others?)


B. Announcing a Code Freeze

  Once all individual and team development Release goals are
understood, the Project manager must decide upon the time at which
to begin the Release process.  Once Step 1. of this process has
begun, no code should be added to the main line of development until
after Part H. of the Release process has completed.  This period is
known as a "code freeze".

  It is the responsibility of the Release maker to coordinate this
freeze period amongst ALL team members and groups by formally
announcing its inception WELL IN ADVANCE.  This announcement should
take on written form, and should be distributed at least 48 hours in
advance, all consensus concerning Release date notwithstanding.

  When Releases are done over weekends and holidays, the source
files may be assumed to be less active than normal; these times make
ideal Release-making periods, as the required freeze time can be
minimized.


C. Incrementing The Release Version Number


  In the JB: root directory (obtainable by executing Dired on the
directory specification "JB:~;") will appear a series of directories
named "K-<version>" where <version> is an integer.

  The Version Number of the new Release will be the integer one
greater than the <version> component of the highest existing
"K-<version>" directory name.  For the purposes of this document, we
will assume that the current Release is contained in the directory
"JB:K-<n>;", and the desired new Release will be contained in the
directory "JB:K-<n+1>".  These directories correspond to Release
Versions n and n+1, respectively.

  The directory named "JB:K-TEST-SOURCES;" exists as a temporary
repository for copies of the Falcon sources during trial runs for
new Releases.

  1. Create the new "JB:K-<n+1>;" directory, and confirm that
     the directory "JB:K-TEST-SOURCES;" is empty.


D. Copying the Falcon Source Files


  2. Copy the "#>" versions of all LISP files found in
     "JB:K-<n>" into "JB:K-TEST-SOURCES;".


E. Compiling the Copies


  For now, it is necessary to compile Falcon files on a machine
with a Falcon installed.  Compile the copies of the source files
in "JB:K-TEST-SOURCES;", thereby generating automatically the
corresponding binary files into the new directory.

  3. a. Evaluate

        (switch-k-release "K-TEST-SOURCES" "JB")

     b. Evaluate

        (load-k-system :recompile)

     c. Evaluate

        (mega-boot :compile-type :recompile)

  4. Repeat Steps 3b. and 3c., until the system compiles
     completely and correctly.


F. Regression Testing the Compiled Release


  5. Run the regression test suite on the test system.

  If minimal acceptability levels are not recorded in Step 5.,
then the maker of the Release should bring pertinent performance
issues to the attention of the Project team as quickly as
possible for reconciliation in the K-TEST-SOURCES directory.
When the copies of the source files have been corrected, the
Release maker should go back to Step 3b. and proceed as before.

  ["Minimal acceptability levels," as used above, means, at least
for now, that no newly created Release should fail to meet the
performance levels of the previous one.  A set of regression
tests for the LISP language, as well as for other LISP Machine
system modules, will be constructed and used for this purpose.
The Gabriel benchmarks may also be used as a part of this test
suite.]

  Any other tests which have been devised for testing a Falcon
Release should be run now as well.

   Should Step 5. become a bottleneck, the freeze period should
be lifted, the current Release process aborted, and a new one
attempted at a later date.


G. Creating a New Falcon System


  To create a new Falcon system, simply copy the LISP sources and
the binary files from "JB:K-TEST-SOURCES;" both to "JB:K;" and to
"JB:K-<n+1>;" using the function MAKE-K-SYSTEM-RELEASE.

  6. Evaluate the form

     (make-k-system-release <host> <n+1>)

     where

     <host> is the name of the system host on which the release is
            to be created (We are currently using "JB:")

     and

     <version> is the version number of the release.


H. Substituting Modified Copies Back into the Main Development
   Hierarchy

  If any of the LISP source file copies were modified and recompiled in
Part F., then these versions
and the new binary files they generated (later in Part F.) should be
included in the set of files copied back into the main K development
hierarchy (currently "JB:K;").  At this point the code freeze may be
considered over; files in the main line may once again be considered
open for further development.

I. Archiving Old Falcon Releases

Once the "K-TEST-SOURCES;" directory has been copied back into the
"K;" directory, all files in K-TEST-SOURCES should be renamed to the
"JB:K-<n+1>" directory.  These files then serve as an archived
Release of the state of Falcon development until the next Release is
undertaken.



OPEN ISSUES:



Limitations on disk space suggest adoption of a rational scheme for
deleting old and excess versions of files.  All current ("#>")
versions of LISP and binary source files will be kept online.

All archived Releases over three months old will be migrated to tape
format to free up disk space.

Discretion is advised when migrating or deleting source or binary
files other than those mentioned here.

COMMENTS:

STATUS: Open
