
Name:   Attainment of a Falcon-compatible interpreter environment on the
Lambda

Date:   9/12/88

Programmers:    K. Corbett, D. Saslav

Est. Work:      5 weeks

Project status: Under review

Purpose: This project represents part of the effort to prepare for
testing and integration of the Falcon and the Lambda computing
environments.  The process will yield improved compatibility between
internal Lambda and Falcon mechanisms, significantly enhancing
maintainability.

Description:    One of the design goals of a recently written LISP
evaluator was the avoidance of machine-dependent constructs.  Therefore,
one possible avenue toward completing this project is:

        A) A switchover to the new evaluator.

        The merits of this plan lie in the highly modular and clear
design of the new evaluator, the ease with which it and any extensions
made to it may be maintained, the fact that no efforts need be expended
to ensure Falcon compatibility, and the provision of an opportunity to
rethink fundamental implementation decisions.  The disadvantages of this
plan are the fact that a significant programming effort will be required
to write all of the extensions required to support current Lambda
features.  There is no way of telling how much work will be involved in
achieving complete Lambda compatibility.

        An alternative to this route is:

        B) A port of the existing Lambda interpreter to the
        Falcon, after all Lambda-specific code has been eliminated.

        The merits of this plan lie mainly in the fact that the Lambda
interpreter is a relatively known quantity that has matured into a
reasonably stable state.  The disadvantages of this plan lie in the
amount of Lambda-specific code which has been written into the current
Lambda evaluator (all such code would have to be identified as such,
understood, and then rewritten in a processor-independent fashion).

        In the worst case, it will be found that certain cases of
incorrect behavior on the part of the current Lambda evaluator serve as
necessary functionality for other parts of the Lambda system.  In these
cases, both plans could entail potentially time-consuming redesign
efforts.

        It is unclear how robustly the new evaluator handles low-level
"hooks" (program-dependent expectations of EVAL in system-critical
programs such as Zwei and the error handler); locating all such hooks in
all existing Lambda sources may be an open-ended proposition.  As a
result, Plan A could turn into a long-term, "fix it as it breaks"
scenario.

Procedure:

        I. Code partitioning: Separate the source files
for special forms from standard interpreter functionality (two days)
 -- completed 9/27

        II. Scope Assessment: Analyze overlap between old and new
interpreters, plus the scope of additional functionality required for
Falcon compatibility; also determine which Lambda routines that are
machine-dependent special forms are rewritable for the Falcon. (eight
days)

        III. Specification Decision: If an alternative route is deemed
appropriate, a separate specification will be required. (one day)

        IV. Code Writing: Assess system modules for dependencies on
unique EVAL functionality, writing special-purpose code to handle each
case, for example, in:

The Trace Facility
Stepping Mechanism
The Error Handler
ZWEI
The Window System (?) (ten days)

        V. Validation: Consists of three parts:

        a) General validation of EVAL for normal system operations
           (two days)
        b) Recompile all system modules (one day)
        c) Check each system module for which special-purpose code was
           needed in Step IV (six days)

        VI. Bug Fixing: Repair all critical problems discovered in Step
I, in preparation of release. (at least two days)

        VII. Cold Load Construction: Make and release a band utilizing
the new interpreter. (three days)
