Date: Thursday, 10 July 1986, 10:49-EDT
From: Ken Traub <KT@XX.LCS.MIT.EDU>
Subject: A modest list of suggestions for a better ILL.
To: bug-illustrate@MC.LCS.MIT.EDU
Message-ID: <12221577435.10.KT@XX.LCS.MIT.EDU>

I humbly offer the following suggestions for the improvement of ILL,
arrived at during the course of a marathon session of creating over
40 complex illustrations.  A copy may be found in oak:>kt>ill-suggestions.text.

OK Richard, you asked for it.  Sorry I couldn't think of more things, but after
all I can't spend my time just thinking of improvements for Illustrate...


GENERAL PHILOSOPHY
------------------

The panes need to be grouped better.  The fonts and text-mode panes are fine;
they both hack text, and they are adjacent.  On the other hand, the shapes,
dashing patterns, brush type, brush size, and color panes should all be grouped
together.  I'm continually zipping from the shapes pane to the brush size pane
to the drawing pane.

The splines and closed splines "commands" belong in the shapes pane, not the
command pane.

The flashy transformations belong in the transformation pane, not the misc.
pane.

You have some commands available via mouse, some via keystroke, and some via
m-X (and various combinations thereof).  I think the heuristic for deciding
which should go where should be:
     Via Mouse - only if their use requires mouse input in the drawing pane.
                 These should also be available via keystroke (see below).
     Via Keyboard - includes commands that need only keyboard input, or no
                    other input at all.
     Via M-X - infrequently used commands not needing mouse input.

There are only a few violations of this principle currently:  The file hacking
commands, undelete, and position text should be via keystroke (only).  The
configure and options commands should be via m-x.  The change grid spacing
should be via keystroke and via mousing the grid spacing pane.

Illustrate commands fall into five paradigms.
  1)  Operate on a single object --- Edit and Describe
  2)  Operate on several objects --- Delete, Rebrush, Cut, Select, and Recolor.
  3)  Do something indicated by mouse input --- Magnify and all drawing
      functions.  (Magnify is somewhat different than all the others.)
  4)  Operate on several objects, where the operation is described by mouse
      input --- The transformations.
  5)  Alter illustrate's state in a multiple choice way--- font selection, etc.
  6)  Do something described by typein --- grid size, write files, etc.

The current assignment of keystrokes is schizoid to the extreme.  I think the
following is a consistent model for assigning mousestrokes/keystrokes to these
paradigms:

Paradigm 1)
  Mouse on icon enters a state where mouse-left on an object does it to that
    object.
  Control-Shift-<letter> also enters that state.

Paradigm 2)
  Mouse on icon enters a state where mouse-left on an object does it to that
    object, and mouse-right does it to all objects in a box.
  Control-Shift-<letter> also enters that state.
  Control-<letter> does it to all selected objects.

Paradigm 3)
  Mouse on icon enters a state where that operation may be done by giving the
    appropriate mouse strokes.  Left for point under mouse, right for nearest
    grid point, and middle to complete the operation (when needed, e.g. for
    splines or continuous lines).

Paradigm 4)
  Mouse on icon enters a state where the appropriate mousestrokes performs the
    operation.
  Control-Shift-<letter> also enters that state.
  Control-<letter> does it to all selected objects.

Paradigm 5)
  Mouse on icon performs the selection.

Paradigm 6)
  Keystroke or M-x command does it, prompting for input if needed.

Note that Paradigm 1 stuff could be made more like Paradigm 2 if you
interpreted doing it to several objects as doing it to them one at a time, in
some sequence of illustrate's choosing (perhaps highlighting the object in the
drawing pane as it moves from one to the next).

The rationale for the control/control-shift choice is that the
Control-Shift-<letter> stuff will be done infrequently, with the user
preferring the mouse for that purpose.  On the other hand, the control-<letter>
stuff will be done more frequently.


NEW/ALTERED COMMANDS
--------------------

The cut command should change the dashing pattern to the one currently
selected, and there should be a solid pattern.  Thus, the notion of "uncutting"
is eliminated.

Cut, Rebrush, and Recolor should all be combined into something which does them
all at once.  If you did this, you could even eliminate the individual ones!
This new command would be paradigm 2.  (Note that cut does dashing patterns,
recolor does colors, and rebrush does brush shape, size, and font all at once.
This is a little non-symmetric.)

There should be something which sets the current color, font, brush shape,
brush size, and dashing pattern from a moused object; i.e., something like
Describe but which "remembers" the attributes of what was described.  This
would be paradigm 1.

You need something which puts stuff into the kill ring without removing it from
the current illustration; analagous to EMACS' m-W.  This would be paradigm 2.

Yanked stuff (c-Y) should be selected thereafter.  m-Y should do the EMACSy
thing (I think you told me you did this already...)

There should be a command (via keystroke) to turn off selection without
entering the selection state (analagous to c-G in ZMACS).

There should be some sort of search command which selects all objects of a
given class.  Examples:  all text objects, all rectangles, all red things, all
stuff in brush thickness two, etc, etc, etc.  This is infinitely open-ended, I
realize, but you can probably think up some useful versions of this.

Along the lines above, there ought to be some sort of query replace for text.

There should be an UNDO command, which undoes transformations, rebrushing, etc.
This should be a keystroke.


GRIDS
-----

The current grid spacing should be recorded in the ILL file, and restored when
the file is read back in (this should not prevent the user from switching among
various grid spacings when editing, of course).

The grid should have some indication of every fifth (or tenth) grid point.  One
method is to omit the grid points at the corners of the 5x (10x) grid.  Another
method is to make them darker.  Yet another is to have tick marks in the
margin.  I am forever counting grid points, ruining my eyes in the process.


FILES AND HARDCOPY
------------------

Illustrate has all sorts of output types:  ILL files, PRESS files, HP files,
and soon to be IMP, DVI, etc etc etc.  (how about TTY files?).  I suggest the
following mechanism for dealing with this:  associate a major mode (a la ZMACS)
with each hardcopy type.  This mode is recorded in the ILL file, and determines
which fonts, colors, etc, are available.  Then you can provide explicit
conversion commands for converting from one type to another, which will make
the best approximations it can at converting text and other hard stuff.
Conversions are important when you need something in a hurry and your chosen
hardcopy device has crashed.

Given the above, every illustration can generate two kinds of files:  ILL
files, and X files, where X is the major mode of the file.  With each buffer,
then, there will be two associated filenames and two modified bits.  Illustrate
should query before killing any buffer in which the ILL modified bit is set (I
got screwed by this when I accidently killed an illustration for which I had
written only a PRESS file).

Given the above, the file hacking commands would be:
c-x c-f --- Find ILL file, a la ZMACS (Dawn just wrote the code for this).
            This is complicated, as I explained to Dawn.
c-x I   --- Insert ILL file (read an ill file into the current buffer).
c-x c-v --- Visit ILL File a la ZMACS (not a la EMACS).  Use Help in ZMACS to
            find out exactly what this is for.
c-x c-s --- Save ILL File.  Write an ILL file using buffer's file name.
c-x c-w --- Write ILL File.  Write an ILL file, prompting for a file name.
[something] --- Write Device File.  Write the buffer in format X, where X is the
                major mode for the buffer.
M-X Find X File --- Like Find ILL File, but reads a file in format X, making
                    the buffer be that major mode.
M-X Insert Device File --- Like Insert ILL File, but reads in format X, where X
                           is the major mode for the buffer.
M-X X Mode --- Sets the major mode for the buffer.  If the buffer has stuff in
               it, this implies conversion, and so should query the user first.
M-X Hardcopy --- Sends directly to a device of the appropriate type.

None of the file hacking commands should be via mousestrokes.

There should be a device-independent "marker" object, recorded as such in ILL
files, but written to PRESS files as <==<<, to other files as appropriate.


CONTINUOUS LINES
----------------

Continuous lines should create a bunch of individual lines, not one "continuous
lines" object.  Compromise:  let an option control the behavior of continuous
lines in this respect.  In both cases, aborting gets rid of all segments, and
rubout backs up one point.

When you hit rubout during continuous lines, the mouse position should be
warped to the place where the erased point was.


MISCELLANEOUS
-------------

I prefer ZMACS-style help (select D, C, or A, then give input, one shot only)
to the present ILL-style help.  I'm not too picky about this one, though.

Illustrate INIT files should have the capability of reassigning all keystrokes,
and maybe even icon configuration (!).

Is it possible to maintain two rasters at once, a magnified one and a full
scale one, so that alternation between the two is very fast (via bitblt)?

Here's an idea for the equivalent of keyboard macros:  Let the user select some
objects, drop one, two, or three points, and then assign it a name and
optionally a keystroke.  When the user does m-x name or the assigned keystroke,
he/she then does one, two, or three points on the drawing, and the saved
objects are two, four, or six point transformed into the illustration.  Cool,
huh?

Selection is too hard (we discussed this), but I'm not sure there are any
better solutions.


BUGS
----

The c-m-s-h-V family does not align the illustration properly on the grid
points.

The flashy transformations makes the grid go away sometimes.

If you try to do a circular arc where the first two points are along the line
X = Y, you get an error!

c-m-s-h-sh-W starts on the second line of the quatrain, not the first (Richard,
this is the most serious problem with Illustrate to date.  I hope AIA doesn't
go down the tubes because of it).
-------
