As a function of getting K processors to execute out of NuBus memory, RG
discovered that reading the same address in the virtual-to-physical-address
map occasionally returns incorrect data.  In a test that RG had installed
to assist in tracking the problem, two consecutive reads of the same map
location were found to differ from each other fairly early in the cold
load sequence, and this failure occurred repeatedly and predictably at
the same point on successive mega-boot attempts.  Changing the position of
the reads in memory caused the failure to disappear, something which, we
believe, is characteristic of other less-clearly-delineated failures that
we have experienced.

My investigation with the HP 1630 indicated that one of the two reads was
an instruction that was not in cache, and had to be fetched from main
memory.  (That fetching a line of instructions from NuBus memory takes
nearly ten microseconds limited the resolution of the sample rate that
the logic analyzer could use.)  The logic analyzer trace suggested that
timing for the map read itself was tight.  Although the enable for the
map data onto the MMFIO and MFI busses was asserted in plenty of time,
the fact that the map read occurred at the trailing end of a cache-line
fill, together with the half-clock-cycle delay on the SELVMAHI output
of the memory state machine, meant that the vma was not addressing the
map until less than half a clock cycle before the map output was to be
clocked into the ALU operand register.

Inspection of the source for the memory state machine revealed that the
PC is, in fact, selected as the map address source throughout the cache-
line fill sequence.  This seems to me to be unnecessary, if not
undesirable, since neither on-board memory nor off-board memory should
need the mapped PC address during the data transfer to the processor.
So, I modified the VMAHI bit of the memory state machine to restore
the VMA as the map address source one clock period earlier for both
local and NuBus cache-line reads.  Specifically, I modified bit 1 of
addresses 3D XX1X and 67 XXXX of the MSM3 prom, changing the VMAHI
bit from 1 to 0 in these locations.  After verifying that the change
corrects the problem and has no apparent side effects, I will move
the revised source for the MSM to the ANGEL:/lmi/khh/k/v2/pals
directory as Version 6 of the MSM file.
