;;; Some commentary on C style vs Lisp style.
;;; The C routines for XDR are clever in that
;;; the same routine is used for encoding an object as decoding an object.
;;; E.g. to transmit or receive an integer "i" we say "xdr_int(stream,&i)"
;;; The routines get a pointer to the object, or a pointer to the storage
;;; for the object. This forces in many cases the pre-allocation of storage
;;; by the user. Some XDR routines do the allocation for you though when
;;; given a pointer to a NULL.
;;; Usually in these translations of code documented in C style
;;; to lisp style we like to follow the C closely. This saves writing
;;; more documentation. However, in this case we cannot because there is
;;; no reliable pointer construct besides the locative. The locative
;;; is not portable (that is, it could be supported everywhere but
;;; with drastically different efficiencies) and also unnatural.
;;;
;;; What advantage to the C style here?
;;; (1) less routine names. So shorter names in general.
;;; (2) Only have to write one routine for each user defined datatype.
;;; Clearly (2) is the major advantage, for even though there is an XDR
;;; definition language given in the documentation there is no implementation
;;; of this language provided by SUN. The way a user adds a new constructive
;;; data definition is to write a subroutine that describes how to encode (transmit) the object.
;;; Because of the reflexive property of the underlying primitives
;;; this is also a subroutine to decode (receive) it. If the XDR language extension was
;;; provided it would probably be a macro package that, given an XDR description
;;; generates the C struct and also the transmit and receive routines.
;;;
;;; However, we find it better to actually implement an XDR descriptive declaration,
;;; for this can drive not only the TRANSMIT and RECEIVE routines (which can be compiled
;;; from the description or or interpreted at runtime in a generic fasion)
;;; but also the PRINT, DESCRIBE, and INSPECT parts of the lisp style.
;;; It is fortunate that XDR makes no restriction at all on the machine representation
;;; of the data. It is truely an eXternal description. Therefore we can choose the
;;; most convenient lisp representations.

;;; Decided not to use SI:BUFFERED-STREAM-MIXIN or defflavor.
;;; gratuitous portability. Using CL routines only.

;;; CL doesnt provide a way to define an I/O (in the READ-CHAR, WRITE-CHAR, READ/PRINT sense)
;;; stream. So that this XDR-STREAM is not an I/O stream. Just a construct to use
;;; with the XDR library functions.

;;; We keep a lot of the same names, but the argument conventions are made more lisp like.

;; Library routines.

;; Only two routines, XDR_TRANSMIT and XDR_RECEIVE


;; the void type is a NO-OP, and is useful when
;; we want to skip over elements of structures.
;; have slots known about by lisp but not transmitted.


;;; unfortunately, even though the type of the object can be determined at run time
;;; in the TRANSMIT routine, it cannot be determined in the RECEIVE routine
;;; since XDR does not define type codes to be transmitted.
;;; Therefore we dont bother supporting code for this in TRANSMIT.



;; unsigned = 0 1 2 3  4  5  6  7
;;   signed = 0 1 2 3 -4 -3 -2 -1
;;

;; in lisp enumerations should be symbols.



;; making my own defstruct. what a punt.
;; portability and bugs-in-lmi are my considerations here.


;; thats it for the easy stuff... now for the compound data types.

;; (array <element-type>)
;; (descriminated_union <descrim> <case-0> <value-0> <case-1> <value-1> ...)
;; (structure <part0> <part1> <part2>)

;; (fixed_array <size> <element-type>)
;; note: no "C" library routine for this, so it cannot be in use at this time.




;; what lisp objects should structures and descriminated unions be?
;; in "C" they are struct's. Defstructs would be natural for lisp.
;; Here is where even in lisp our data-driven TYPE concept falls down
;; and the user-has-to-write-a-subroutine would win. There is no consistent
;; defstruct subprimtives in common lisp. that is, how to make a named array
;; and how to aref it. So we define XDR_STRUCTURE.


  ;; now, it would be fancy to be able to use lisp types here.
  ;; but not possible in all cases.
  ;; the descriminated-union structure is extra bagage we just have to put up with.




;; perhaps because of common-lisp motivated modifications we have the
;; following strange situation.
;; (global:defstruct (foo :named) ...) gives an array one longer than really needed,
;; with the 0 slot have the name or NIL.
;; (lisp:defstruct foo ...) also gives an array one longer.
;; however slot 0 is not the name. Perhaps this is a bug in the lmi CL implementation.
;; Slot 0 is the first slot of the structure.

;; To add a new type called LIST.
;; many structures are given as a structure that is a descriminated union
;; with two boolean cases. FALSE case indicating VOID, TRUE case indicating
;; an element of a given structure, with last leg of that structure being
;; itself, i.e. a descriminated union.
;; We call this a list.



Here is an example of this from the port mapper.

We would code the maplist structure like this:

(xdr_descriminated_union 'maplist_next
                         'boole
                         '((nil void)
                           (t maplist)))
(xdr_structure 'maplist
               '((prog u_int)
                 (vers u_int)
                 (prot protocol)
                 (port u_int)
                 (next maplist_next)))

Then receive this value with (xdr_receive stream 'maplist_next).
A fairly ugly return value.

Instead of threading the list using the structure itself we can
observe that it is the idiom of having the NEXT slot be the last.
So instead:

(xdr_structure 'port-mapping
               '((prog u_int)
                 (vers u_int)
                 (prot protocol)
                 (port u_int)))

and to receive these (xdr_receive stream '(list port-mapping))
so we are doing exactly that, receiving a list of port mappings.
