                     Lambda Machine Console Program

Documentation:

It's like DDT
ie <register>/  "opens" the register and prints it out.
   <new value><cr>  when a register is open modifies the register and closes it.
   <lf>  opens the next higher register and prints it.
   ^     opens the next lower register and prints it.
   <space> or +  act as arithmetic +.
   <tab> open quantity addressed by pointer field of last quantity typed.
   <page>  refreshes display
   =   types numeric value of last value typed (by you or it)

Further Documentation:

^R      reset
^N      step
n^N     step n times, n < 40000
adr^N   step until about to execute micro instr at adr
:AUTO-STEP  step in loop until character typed.
^P      run until char typed
^L      clear screen
^S     stop machine
^T     start machine and enter remote console mode.
105 FOOBAR  start machine
<arg>:G  (arg a control-mem register address).  set PC of machine preparitory to starting.

:MODIFY prints uinsts in OPC buffer which modify arg (an A or M location). if no arg,
           print those which modify open location (which should be in A or M memory).
:AFFECT prints uinsts which "affect" this uinst (modify register addressed by A or M address
          of this guy).
:DESCRIBE-AREAS  give information about areas
:AREA   prints area that last value typed points to.
:REGION prints region that last value typed points to.
:DESCRIBE-REGION give information about region <arg>.
:system-communication-area  print entire contents of system-communication-area
:scratch-pad-init-area      similar.
:MAPS   prints maps (1st and 2nd level) addressed by last value typed.
:STKP   give backtrace of info on stack. Preceeding numeric arg is number of
          frames worth.  All are printed if arg is absent.  If arg negative,
          print (abs arg) frames direct from PDL-BUFFER (bypassing memory mapping, etc).
          Any character typed during printout will abort rest of printout.
:TRACE  like :STKP except that if the last value examined is a stack group
          that stack group will be traced instead of the current one.
:TRACEN like TRACE, but doesnt print args.
:ATOM foo  tell about atomic symbol foo
:FUNCTION foo  tell about foo's function cell
:PROPERTY foo  tell about foo's property list.
:BACTRACE
:BACKTRACE
:MEMSTAT tell all about all pages that are swapped in
:RELPC  types out what M-AP points to, and if thats a FEF, prints out what
          LC is relative to that.
:CODE   disassembles the macrocoded function being executed.
:DISASSEMBLE-FEF  disassembles last quantity typed.  Asks for center-PC or NIL.
:CHECK-MAP  checks contents of hardware map against PAGE-HASH-TABLE.
        (takes quite a long time)
:CHECK-MAP-BULK  similar, but doesnt take quite as long.
:CHECK-REVERSE-LEVEL-2-MAP-BULK

:PF    Interprets open register as LP-FEF Q of a PDL-FRAME, and prints
          the entire frame.
:previous-active-frame  if the FEF word of a frame is open, open the previous active frame.
:previous-open-frame    likewise, the previous open frame.
:FLAGS  Decode M-FLAGS
:INTOFF disable machine interrupts
:INTON  Turn machine interrupts on.
:tvintoff  turn off interrupts from TV.
:tvinton   turn on interrupts from TV.
arg :PHYS-MEM-WORD-SEARCH   Searches real core for arg  **CROCK** FOR NOW IT ONLY
                                SEARCHES 128K.  FIX WHEN LAM KNOWS ABOUT REAL MEM.
:DESCRIBE  if last quantity typed is a closure or entity, prints CLOSURE-ALIST sort
            of thing.  if a stack-group, prints info from stack group header.
:DESCRIBE-LEXICAL-ENVIRONMENT
:PCHECK    Use this to track down problems with hardware parity checkers.
           Types what the parity generator chips for the last quantity examined
           should put out.  Works for C-MEM ..add others.. .

newer stuff:
:with-output-to-file {filename colon-cmd}
        after specifing the filename as a string, specify a colon command
        as usual, and the any output printed will be sent both to the file and
        to the screen.
:select-speed  put up menu for selecting TRAM speed.
:lam-iopb  print disk command block used by main ucode
:debug-iopb  command block used by lam program itself
:sdu-iopb
:prom-iopb   used by prom
:csm    print symbolic address of csm-adr
:print-active-mapping-regs   print lambda-iopb, and mapping registers it addresses
:eagle-initialize, initialize-disk-control
:rg or :rg-mode, :dp or :dp-mode   prints respective mode registers.
:mid   print symbols contents of mid addressed by last quan typed or arg.
:select-symbols  put up a menu with various options.
:dump-original-symbols
:macro-break  insert a breakpoint into macrocode by smashing an instruction
:macro-unbreak  remove macrocode breakpoint.  Seems to lose, look at this! RG
:macro-restore  replace smashed instruction
<arg>:macro-single-step  set (1) or clear (0) hardware single step mode flag.
<n>:force-macro-return.  attempt to force n levels of macrocode subroutine return.
:cold-boot  cold boot machine (after ucode loaded).  Writes memory configuration info.
:cold-boot-and-load-symbols  load symbols while its cold-booting
:cold-boot-setup    as in cold boot, but dont really start machine.  Does set up memory
                configuration.
:start-prom  transfer to PROM at location 36000 (or maybe 36001 in share mode).
:chaos-meters  print out chaos meters of debugged machine
:ether-meters  print out ethernet meters of debugged machine.
:opc-search  search OPCs for a symbol you type.
:summerize-opcs  (spelling due to PACE)
:cache-on       turn on cache (hardware enable it, and set bit in a-l2-map-control-bits)
:cache-on     turn off cache.  inverse of above.
:print-unibus-channels
:foothold  ??
:int-level (explorer only)

in CADRD:

:START -  adr :START,   start machine, let it run
:LOWLEVEL -  :LOWLEVEL T turns on low-level mode, in which reading most registers
   gets what is currently in the machine rather than what is saved,
   writing is unaffacted.  Makes the display at the bottom of the screen useful with :EX
   :LOWLEVEL VERY enters a mode where LAM tries not to "spontaneously" affect the
   hardware in any way.  This means only the "passive" machine state is available,
   ie no saving - frobbing - restoring is permitted.  If random things not part of
   the passive state are examined, etc, ideally the saving, etc should be done
   at that time.  BE VERY CAREFUL
:MODE - Decodes the mode register symbolically
:CHMODE - Edits the mode register
:RESTORE -  does a full-restore, getting software state into hardware,
:sm-step -  call SM-STEP program (minor cycle stepper)
:select-test - call SELECT-TEST program (menu interfact to simple loop tests)
:EX - Execute .IR once.
:SCOPE causes the machine to execute whatever is in DEBUG-IR
         repeatedly at full speed.  Deposit in .IR just before doing this.


Breakpoints:
:B      set breakpoint at prefix arg or open location
:UB     unset breakpoint at ..
:LISTB  list breakpoints
:UAB    unset all breakpoints
:RB     reset all breakpoints (useful if they have been loaded over)
:P      proceed
:G    do 1@G and :P
:TB     set temporary breakpoint at .. (temp bkpt goes away when reached)
:TBP    set temporary breakpoint and proceed
:RETURN-BREAK  Set breakpoint where current CALL instruction will return
:US-BREAK  Set breakpoint at current open US stack locn, to top of US if no reg open.

Initial Symbols
RESET VMA MWD RAIDR PSV FSV RUNNING TRYING-TO-RUN MODE
LLMOD NOOPF FDEST FSRC .IR IR PC USP Q DC PP PI CIB OPC

  Since there are many different memories in the machine, each having
addresses running from 0 to some power of 2, a large space of register addresses
is defined, and the various memories are assigned parts of it.
A register address can be referred to either by specifying which memory
and the address within the memory, as in 200@C for location 200 in control memory,
or by specifying the register address, which would be 200+RACMO for that location.

-400000<n<0      register address space, various memories etc.
(minus 400000+n) physical main memory location n ("concatenated" locns)
positive number n  virtual memory location n

n@C     control memory
n@D     dispatch memory
n@P     PDL buffer
n@1     map 1
n@2C    map level 2 control bits
n@2P   map level 2 physical page
n@A     A memory
n@U     micro return stack
n@M     M memory
FS n    functional sources
FD n    functional destinations
LAM n   "special" registers, e.g. PC, USP
CSW n   CCONS control switches
RAIDR n  Raid registers
CIB n   Console inst buffers
OPC n  Old PCs

n@G     set PC
@Q      last frob typed (like Q in DDT)

_nn     rotate left nn places (32 bits).  follow by space or equals to type out.

_A      type out as array header
_B      type out as bytes (right to left)
_D      type out as header
_H      type out as halfwords LH,,RH
_I      type out as macro instruction
_Q      type out as lisp Q
_S      type out as lisp machine S expression (ie do PRINT, sort of)
          LAM-SEXP-PRINLEVEL and LAM-SEXP-PRINLENGTH control how deep and
          how long things will go, respectively.
_U      type out as micro instruction
_V      type out as micro instruction, old style.
_X      type out as hex
__      type out as register address
_#     type out as bit numbers of set bits.
` (left slant) instead of _ causes type-in mode
In type-in mode,  completes what has been typed so far
as much as possible, ? lists possible completions, space
terminates the syllable.  You can type just a space and
if there is one possibility that types nothing in
type-out mode, (i.e. a default) it will get used.

' (right slant) is similar except typing just a space leaves
the field set to its previous value.
In the MODE register, bit 1.1=run slow, bit 1.2=disable error halts
