-*- Mode: Text -*-


                          Release Plans for 3.0

                      Release Package Specification


1)      Boot Tape (SDU and Unix Root)
2)      Unix User Files (optional)
3)      Lisp Band tape
4)      Lisp source tape(s)
5)      Documentation update package
6)      Release notes
7)      Cover letters

Users that still require Version 7 will get a different version of
both the Boot Tape and the User Files.




                         Release Cycle Breakdown


1)      Alpha Preparation - Making of Alpha Release package for testing
2)      Alpha Test Cycle  - Explained below in detail
3)      Beta Preparation  - Explained below in detail
4)      Beta Test Cycle   - Explained below in detail
5)      Final Preparation - Explained below in detail
6)      Final Release     - Signoff and distribution



                          Release plans for 3.0

                           Software Test Cycle

                            General Overview


[Core System testing]

        This involves testing of the basic system software.  The exact
definition of 'core system' is outlined below.  The associated
activities range from general use of the system facilities by the test
person to the development and use automated test programs.  For release
3.0, it would be immediately advantageous to develop an automated test
program for testing Common Lisp support.  This task would take very
little extra effort, since Common Lisp at this point is a very stable
standard and it simply requires recording the test procedures that will
be used during this cycle in a manner that they could be understood and
automatically run by a simple program.  The existence of this program
would virtually eliminate testing of Common Lisp from manpower
considerations in all future test cycles.  This, of course, does not
exempt consideration of bug fixing time.


[Software Option Testing]

        Testing and bug fixing here should be a bit easier than for the
core software since the interdependencies are fewer (with the exception
of TCP) and the functionality more isolated.  The engineers responsable
for the existence of each particular option will likewise be responsible
for fixing (or helping others fix) any problems encountered.  They may,
of course, decide that a particular bug cannot be fixed in view of the
time constraints of the release or the complexity of the bug and
possible adverse affects (like more bugs).





                          Release Plans for 3.0

                           Release Test Cycle

                             Critical Issues


Stability of test machines:

        This is always a critical issue, but the importance of this
release should be reflected in the the availability of spare parts and
repair turnaround time.  Problems in this respect will adversly effect
the release schedule.

Communications between Customer Service and Engineering:

        My concern here is in terms of hardware and software support.
The UUCP link between Andover and Cambridge is the only acceptable means
for relaying bug reports and information, and any release schedules will
assume its complete reliability. It is certainly possible to relay the
necessary information by other means, but this poses such a degradation
in efficiency that we would have to completely reevaluate all
appropriate schedules.

Constant feedback loop:

        It will be important to maintain a constant flow of information
between engineering and customer service.  This means that update
reports (that can be automatically generated) and patches will need to
be issued on at least a daily basis between Customer Service and
Engineering.  This will allow the constant tracking of the test cycle by
both Engineering and Customer Service and provide enough information to
allow the release plan to be adjusted wherever appropriate to optimize
the release process.

Availability of people for testing and documentation verification:

        The important factor here is that those who are testing the
system and reporting bugs can identify the most efficient means for
relaying the information to bug fixers.  This includes supplying code
that can reproduce the bug if possible, knowing when to 'get someone who
knows' and understanding that a vague bug report is worse than no bug
report at all.

Commitment of resources:

        The management of all departments must be willing and able to
act upon reasonable requests for resources and assistance.  This must be
acknowledged throughout the management hierarchy, so that we can take
advantage of any optimizations of the plan that may become apparent at
a later date.



                          Release Plans for 3.0

                           Release Test Cycle

                   Customer Service Activity Breakdown


Software Testing and Bug Reporting:

        - Testing
        - Reporting and internally documenting bugs
        - Tracking bug status
        - Testing fixes
        - Reporting success of fixes


Documentation Overview:

        - Reviewing entire documentation update package
        - Submitting and tracking documentation changes
        - Recheck changed sections of final version


Installation Procedure Overview:

        - Test installation procedures for all supported
          system configurations
        - Test configurations of systems with all hardware options
        - Submit improvement requests


Continual Tracking of Test Cycle:

        - Track and analyze both CS and ENG progress
        - Suggest improvements for test cycle
        - Issue progress reports to ENG




                          Release Plans for 3.0

                           Release Test Cycle

                     Engineering Activity Breakdown


Bug Fixing:

        - Gathering existing bug reports from Customer Service
        - Filtering out 'non-bugs'
        - Prioritizing bugs by complexity and severity
        - Fixing and documenting bugs
        - Submitting appropriate changes to documentation


Continual re-evaluation of software:

        - Documentation or fixing of possible future bugs
        - Prediction and documentation of possible user problems
        - Submitting changes/additions to documentation as deemed necessary


Environment Checking:

        - Test source/band continuity
        - Environmental analysis (paging fragmentation, etc.)


Continual Tracking of Test Cycle:

        - Track and analyze both CS and ENG progress
        - Suggest improvements for test cycle
        - Issue progress reports to CS



                          Release Plans for 3.0

                        Release Preparation Cycle


Bug Fix Finalization: (Release Group & CS)
        1. Assess outstanding bugs
        2. Re-run any automated tests
        3. Set up final fix margin for critical bugs
        4. Make final bug fixes (carefully)
        5. Consolidate internal bug tracking documentation

Documentation Update: (Documentation Group)
        1. Add bugs fixed to Bug-Fix Notes
        2. Make any changes to user documentation updates
        3. Make any changes to Release Notes necessary

Final Visual Examination: (Release Group & CS)
        1. Superficial examination of system modules
        2. Check site information
        3. Check disk-saving, booting, initializations, etc.

Distribution: (Manufacturing)
        1. Make tapes
        2. Make documentation packages
        3. Write cover letters to customer
        4* Release to Manufacturing (Final Release Only)

Final Release addition: (Release & CS)
        It would be appropriate to have an extra time period allotted
        to a final recheck of the system, including re-test of all patches
        made after Beta release.  This would only be for the final release.



                          Release Plans for 3.0

                           Software Breakdown

Core System:
        Local-file
        Tape (and backup)
        Zmail
        Printer Software
        Kermit
        ObjectLisp
        Gateway
        Window Site Editor
        Font Editor
        General Lisp System

Options:
        Vista
        Medium-Res Color
        Imagen software
        TCP/IP
        Microcompiler (to be discussed)
